18/01/31 = Wed

**Exercise 2.26:** Which of the following are legal? For those that are illegal, explain why.

(a) `const int buf;`

(b) `int cnt = 0;`

(c) `const int sz = cnt;`

(d) `++cnt; ++sz;`

**Answer:** (b) (c) are legal.

(a) is illegal in that a `const` object must be initialized [^*].

(d) is illegal in that `sz` cannot be changed as it is a `const`.

[^*]: However, it can be initialized from a value that is not known until run time.

18/02/01 = Thu

**Exercise 2.27:** Which of the following initializations are legal? Explain why.

(a) `int i = -1, &r = 0;`

(b) `int *const p2 = &i2;`

(c) `const int i = -1, &r = 0;`

(d) `const int *const p3 = &i2;`

(e) `const int *p1 = &i2;`

(f) `const int &const r2;`

(g) `const int i2 = i, &r = i;`

**Answer:** (b) (c) (d) (e) (g) are legal.

(a) is illegal because we must bind referent `r` to an `int`.

(f) is illegal because we cannot qualify a reference with `const`.

**Exercise 2.28:** Explain the following definitions. Identify any that are illegal.

(a) `int i, *const cp;`

(b) `int *p1, *const p2;`

(c) `const int ic, &r = ic;`

(d) `const int *const p3;`

(e) `const int *p;`

**Answer:**

(a)  `i` is an `int`. `cp` is a const pointer to `int`. Definition of `cp` is illegal since it's uninitialized.

(b) `p1` is a pointer to `int`. `p2` is a const pointer to `int`. Definition of `p2` is illegal since it's uninitialized.

(c) `ic` is a const `int`. `r` is a reference-to-const `int` bound to `ic`. Definition of `ic` is illegal since it's uninitialized.

(d) `p3` is a const pointer to const `int`. Definition of `p3` is illegal since it's uninitialized.

(e) `p` is a pointer-to-const to `int`.

**Exercise 2.29:** Using the variables in the previous exercise, which of the following assignments are legal? Explain why.

(a) `i = ic;`

(b) `p1 = p3;`

(c) `p1 = &ic;`

(d) `p3 = &ic;`

(e) `p2 = p1;`

(f) `ic = *p3;`

**Answer:**

(a) legal, top-level const can be ignored;

(b) illegal, low-level const cannot be ignored;

(c) illegal, trying to point to a const `int` using a non-const pointer;

(d) illegal, pointer `p3` is const and thus cannot be assigned;

(e) illegal, pointer `p2` is const and thus cannot be assigned;

(f) illegal, `ic` is const and thus cannot be assigned.

**Exercise 2.30:** For each of the following declarations indicate whether the object being declared has top-level or low-level const.

```c++
const int v2 = 0;  int v1 = v2;
int *p1 = &v1, &r1 = v1;
const int *p2 = &v2, *const p3 = &i, &r2 = v2;
```

**Answer:** `v2` has top-level const. `p2` has low-level const. `p3` has both top- and low-level const, `r2` has low-level const.

**Exercise 2.31:** Given the declarations in the previous exercise determine whether the following assignments are legal. Explain how the top-level or low-level const applies in each case.

```c++
r1 = v2;
p1 = p2;  p2 = p1;
p1 = p3;  p2 = p3;
```

**Answer:**

`r1 = v2;` is legal, where `v2` has top-level const and is ignored.

`p1 = p2;` is illegal, where `p2` has low-level const and cannot be ignored.

`p2 = p1;` is legal, where `p1` is converted from non-const to const.

`p1 = p3;` is illegal, where `p3` has low-level const and cannot be ignored.

`p2 = p3;` is legal, where both `p2` and `p3` have low-level const.

**Exercise 2.32:** Is the following code legal or not? If not, how might you make it legal?

```c++
int null = 0, *p = null;
```

**Answer:** Illegal.

If we aim to specify  `p` as `constexpr`, we need to define `null` either as global or static. For example;

```c++
static int null = 0;
constexpr const int * p = &null;
```
