18/02/10 = Sat

**Exercise 7.46:** Which, if any, of the following statements are untrue? Why?

(a) A class must provide at least one constructor.

(b) A default constructor is a constructor with an empty parameter list.

(c) If there are no meaningful default values for a class, the class should not provide a default constructor.

(d) If a class does not define a default constructor, the compiler generates one that initializes each data member to the default value of its associated type.

**Answer:** All are untrue.

(a) If a class does not provide any constructor, the compiler will synthesize one for it.

(b) A default constructor is a constructor that is called if no initializer is supplied. In addition, a constructor that supplies default arguments for all of its parameters also defines the default constructor.

(c) Without a default constructor, a class may cause trouble to other classes which have a member of its type.

(d) The compiler only synthesizes a default constructor when a class does not have any constructor at all.

**Exercise 7.47:** Explain whether the `Sales_data` constructor that takes a string should be `explicit`. What are the benefits of making the constructor explicit? What are the drawbacks?

**Answer:** If the constructor is declared `explicit`, then we forbid the implicit conversion from a `string` to a `Sales_data`. This is acceptable, because a temporary object with only an ISBN, but no quantity, is unlikely to be useful.

Consider Case 1 where `data` is a `Sales_data` and `isbn` is a `string`.

```c++
data.combine(isbn);
```

The operation is meaningless.

Consider Case 2

```c++
data = isbn;
```

This may confuse a reader of the code since we are assigning a `string` to a `Sales_data`.

By declaring `explicit`, we forbid the above two cases, which is perfectly fine, and even desirable.

The benefits versus drawbacks are a trade-off between control and convenience.

**Exercise 7.48:** Assuming the `Sales_data` constructors are not `explicit`, what operations happen during the following definitions

```c++
string null_isbn("9-999-99999-9");
Sales_data item1(null_isbn);
Sales_data item2("9-999-99999-9");
```

What happens if the `Sales_data` constructors are `explicit`?

```c++
class Sales_data {
public:
    Sales_data() = default;
    Sales_data(const std::string &s, unsigned n, double p):
               bookNo(s), units_sold(n), revenue(p*n) { }
    explicit Sales_data(const std::string &s): bookNo(s) { }
    explicit Sales_data(std::istream&);
    // remaining members as before
};
```

**Answer:** Whether the `Sales_data` constructors are `explicit` or not have no impact on this case. What matters is whether the `string` constructor from a `const char *` is `explicit`. It is not. Thus implicit conversion is allowed, and the initializations of `item1` and `item2` should happen as expected.

**Exercise 7.49:** For each of the three following declarations of `combine`, explain what happens if we call `i.combine(s)`, where `i` is a `Sales_data` and `s` is a `string`:

(a) `Sales_data &combine(Sales_data);`

(b) `Sales_data &combine(Sales_data&);`

(c) `Sales_data &combine(const Sales_data&) const;`

**Answer:** Assuming no `explicit` for `Sales_data(string)`.

(a) A temporary `Sales_data` object initialized from `s` is combined with `i`.

(b) Illegal. We cannot bind a *plain* reference to a temporary object. It could be legal if the declaration were `Sales_data & combine(const Sales_data &)`.

(c) Illegal. Declaring a member function `const` forbids any further change to the object. Thus we cannot combine anything to `i`.

**Exercise 7.50:** Determine whether any of your `Person` class constructors should be `explicit`.

```c++
class Person
{
	friend istream & read(istream &, Person &);
	friend ostream & print(ostream &, const Person &);

	string name;
	string addr;
public:
	Person(const string & n) : name(n) {}
	Person(const string & n, const string & a) : name(n), addr(a) {}
	string get_name() const { return name; }
	string get_addr() const { return addr; }
};
```

**Answer:** Constructor `Person(const string & n)` takes only one single argument but should not be declared `explicit`. In a large sense, when we speak of a person's name, we are referring to that person. However, if we had a constructor like `Person(istream & is)`, then we should declare it as `explicit`, because it would be confusing for a function that takes a `Person` as parameter to take an `istream &` such as `std::cin`.

**Exercise 7.51:** Why do you think `vector` defines its single-argument constructor as `explicit`, but `string` does not?

**Answer:** (17/11/02 = Thu) Semantically, a number (`size_type`) is far away from a `vector`, but a C-style `char` array is closely related to a `string`. Therefore, whenever a `string` is needed as a parameter, we may pass a `const char *` to initialize it, but when a `vector` is needed, we cannot just pass a `size_type`.

Consider

```c++
vector::size_type size(vector<int> vec) { return vec.size(); }
```

If without `explicit`, implicit conversion would be allowed, and it would be very confusing to allow a call like `size(42)`.

On the other hand, consider

```c++
string::size_type size(string str) { return str.size(); }
```

It wouldn't be surprising to see a call like `size("Hello, World!")`. For this convenience we allow the implicit conversion and do not declare `explicit` for the `string` constructor.

**Exercise 7.52:** Using our first version of `Sales_data` from *ยง 2.6.1 (p. 72)*, explain the following initialization. Identify and fix any problems.

```c++
Sales_data item = {"978-0590353403", 25, 15.99};
```

```c++
struct Sales_data {
    std::string bookNo;
    unsigned units_sold = 0;
    double revenue = 0.0;
};
```

**Answer:** An aggregate class cannot have any in-class initializers. Thus, in order to initialize `item` with a curly braced list, we need to rewrite the class definition as

```c++
struct Sales_data {
	std::string bookNo;
    unsigned units_sold;
    double revenue;
};
```

