18/02/09 = Fri

#### Chapter 7 Classes

On the default constructor:

1. when we supply any constructor, the compiler won't synthesize a default constructor for us;
   1. the basis for such a rule is that the compiler believes if a class requires control to initialize an object in one case, it is likely to require control in call cases;
   2. in this case, if we do not provide a default constructor, then the class will not allow default initialization;
   3. in this case, if we still want the synthesized default constructor as well as other constructors that we provide, we may specify the default constructor as `= default`;
2. data members of built-in types that are default initialized have undefined values;
3. the compile may fail to synthesize a default constructor if the class have data members of certain class types which do not allow default initialization.

Synthesize versions of copy, assignment, and destruction are unlikely to work correctly for classes that allocate resources that reside outside the class object themselves. To avoid this complexity, use `vector` or `string` to help manage the memory.

- A *copy constructor* is used to initialize a *previously uninitialized* object.


- An *assignment operator* is used to replace the data of a *previously initialized* object.

> What are the fundamental ideas behind the classes?

Data abstraction and data encapsulation.

- *Data abstraction* separates interface and implementation.
- *Data encapsulation* enforces that separation.

With *data abstraction*, users of a class may perform all the available operations provided by the class without worrying about how they are implemented. 

*With data encapsulation*, this separation is enforced by access control. The users have access to the interface but have no access to the implementation.

A class that uses data abstraction and encapsulation defines an abstract data type.

##### 7.1 Defining Abstract Data Types

> What is `this`?

A `const` pointer to the object, which is implicitly initialized from the address of the object. It serves as an extra, implicit parameter of the member function. (When we call `obj.f()`, it is as if we call `C::f(&obj)`.)

> What does the `const` at the end of a member function modify?

The implicit `this` pointer, so that it becomes a const pointer-to-const.

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> struct S
> {
>     int foo(int a) { return a * m; }
>     int m = 42;
> };
> ```
>
> Why is it legal to use `m` in `foo` before its definition?

The compiler processes a class in two steps:

1. first member declarations, and then
2. member function bodies.

> Can we declare a member function that takes an `ostream &` as `const`?

No.

> What's the return type of a constructor?

A constructor has no return type.

> Why do we use `= default`?

If we have supplied any constructors, the compiler will not provide a synthesized default constructor for us. If we still want to have the synthesized default constructor as well as other constructors, we may define default constructor as `= default`.

##### 7.2 Access Control and Encapsulation

`public` and `private` are access *specifiers*.

On the `friend` declaration:

1. may appear only once;
2. may appear anywhere in the class;
3. only specifies access and does not substitute general declaration.

##### 7.3 Additional Class Features 

On the `inline` specifier:

- The textbook: describes `inline` as a request to the compiler to expand the function "in line" at each call so as to avoid the normal function-call overhead.
- However, the stack-overflow mainstream believe that nowadays this request is largely dismissed by the compiler. Functions are not necessarily inlined when they are requested so, and vice versa. In addition, don't think that marking a function `inline` will make it faster. To one extreme, some argue that `inline` should not even appear in any `.cpp` file.  The only chance we may use `inline` is in the header where we *define* a small function, which may help the compiler in optimization.
- Functions marked with `inline` can be defined for multiple times. The compiler needs to see the definition, not just the declaration. All the definitions must match exactly. However, an example on the stack-overflow shows that
  1. it is our duty, not the compiler's responsibility, to make sure the consistency;
  2. `-O2` optimization encourages compiler to *actually expand* the functions that can be inlined.
- If we have multiple declarations/definitions, do we have to mark each of them `inline`? For definitions, yes; for declarations, no.


> Can we define a pointer/reference to a class type if we have only forward declared it?
>
> Can we define a function using a parameter of this class type then?

Yes. No.

*We can only declare, but not define, a function using a parameter of a class type which we only forward declared.*

> Can a class have a data member of its own type?

No unless that data member is *static*.

*Static data members can have incomplete types.*

*For a class to use its own type, use pointers or references.*

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> class C
> {
> 	friend void f() {}
>     char c;
> public:
> 	void g() { f(); }
> };
> ```

Even we define a friend function inside the class, and use it only in the class, we must additionally declare it, because a friend declaration only affects access and is not a declaration in an ordinary sense. In this case, add `void f();` in the class.

> Can a member function take a parameter of its own class type?
>
> Can it return an object of its own class type?

Yes. Yes.

##### 7.4 Class Scope

Class definitions are processed in two phases:

1. first, member declarations are compiled;
2. function bodies are compiled only after the entire class has been seen.

This only applies to names used in the *body* of a member function.

##### 7.5 Constructors Revisited

We must use the constructor initializer list to provide values for members that are const, reference, or of a class type that does not have a default constructor.

Every constructor that can be called with a single argument defines an implicit conversion to a class type. To *prevent* such implicit conversion, use `explicit` on the constructor declaration inside the class.

- `string` constructor that takes a `const char *` *is not* `explicit`
- `vector` constructor that takes a size *is* `explicit`

Simply put, `constexpr` promises "*to be known at compile time*".

Literal types are closely related to the  constant expression.

- The types we may use in a constant expression are known as literal types. That is, we can only use literal types in a constant expression.
- A `constexpr` function, or a function that can be used in a constant expression, must use literal types as its return type and parameter types.

Literal types includes:

1. arithmetic types;
2. reference/pointer types;
3. literal classes; and
4. enumerations.

In order to qualify as a literal class, a class may be

1. an aggregate class whose members are all of literal types; to be an aggregate class --
   1. all data members are `public`
   2. no constructors
   3. no in-class initializers
   4. no base classes or `virtual` functions
2. meeting the following criteria
   1. all data members are of literal types
   2. at least one `constexpr` constructor
   3. the in-class initializers, if any, must be constant expressions or use the members' own `constexpr` constructors
   4. use the default definition for its destructor

> What's the problem with the following class definitions, and how to fix it?
>
> ```c++
> class A {
>     int a;
> public:
> 	A(int a) : a(a) {}
> };
>
> class B {
> 	A a;
> public:
> 	B(A a) { this->a = a; }
> };
> ```

Since class `A` does not have a default constructor, class `B` must initialize its member `a`, which is of class type `A`, using the constructor initializer list. It is too late to assign with `this->a = a;` in the body of the constructor.

> Is the following class definition legal?
>
> ```c++
> class X {
>     int a, b;
> public:
> 	X(int a) : b(this->a), a(a) {}
> };
> ```

Yes

> By the C++14, there is a critical problem with Lippman's code in *7.5.6 Literal Classes*. Identify and fix it.
>
> ```c++
> class Debug {
> public:
>     constexpr Debug(bool b = true): hw(b), io(b), other(b) {}
>     constexpr Debug(bool h, bool i, bool o): hw(h), io(i), other(o) {}
>     constexpr bool any() { return hw || io || other; }
>     void set_io(bool b) { io = b; }
>     void set_hw(bool b) { hw = b; }
>     void set_other(bool b) { hw = b; }
> private:
>     bool hw;    // hardware errors other than IO errors
>     bool io;    // IO errors
>     bool other; // other errors
> };
> ```

Member function `any` must be qualified with `const`. [^C++11]

If we call `any` on a `Debug` object, which could be a constant expression, the implicit `this` passed to `any` is `const`, so we must append a `const` to the end of the empty parameter list of `any`, which modifies the implicit `this`:

```c++
constexpr bool any() const { return hw || io || other; }
```

[^C++11]: C++11 stated that all non-static member functions that were declared `constexpr` were also implicitly declared `const`, with respect to `this`. That has since been removed; non-static member functions may be non-`const` in C++14.

##### 7.  `static` Class Members

- Objects do not contain data associated with `static` data members.

- A `static` member function does not have a `this` pointer and may not be declared as `const`.

- When we define a `static` member outside the class, we do not repeat the `static` keyword.

- Because a `static` data member is not part of an individual object, it is not defined when we create an object. Ordinarily, we should not initialize a `static` member inside the class.

- However, there is an exception. We *may* provide in-class initializers for `static` members that have `const` integral type, and *must* do so for `constexpr` of literal types. However, if there is any chance we use these `static` members outside the class, we must also define them outside the class. In such case, the definition must no specify an initial value, since it has been given in the in-class initializer.

- A `static` member can be used in ways ordinary members can't:

  - it can have incomplete type
    -  in particular, it may have the same type as that of the class that it belongs to
  - it can be used as a default argument


> Can we provide a `static` class member an in-class initializer?

No, unless that member has a `const` integral type.