18/02/10 = Sat

18/03/13 = Tue: Redesign Book for Exercise 7.40, see revised `lp-07-42.cpp` for implementation

**Exercise 7.39:** Would it be legal for both the constructor that takes a `string` and the one that takes an `istream&` to have default arguments? If not, why not?

**Answer:** For the `Sales_data` constructors, no. Because that would lead to ambiguous call if we defined a `Sales_data` using `Sales_data data;`.

**Exercise 7.40:** Choose one of the following abstractions (or an abstraction of your own choosing). Determine what data are needed in the class. Provide an appropriate set of constructors. Explain your decisions.

(a) Book

(b) Date

(c) Employee

(d) Vehicle

(e) Object

(f) Tree

**Answer:** We choose (a).

```c++
class Book
{
	string isbn;
	string title;
	string author;
public:
	Book(string isbn = "", string title = "", string author = "");
	Book(istream & is);
};
```

An ISBN is the unique identifier for a book. If anything is supplied, we require to know its ISBN.

A book usually has a title and an author. We allow a book to be constructed without supplying those data members. But if an author is supplied, we require the book's title be supplied as well. This is natural.

In addition, we allow read this information from `istream &` such as `std::cin`.

How do we deal with `istream &` whose contents read like

```c++
978-7-121-20038-0
978-7-121-20038-0 C++_Primer
978-7-121-20038-0 C++_Primer Lippman
```

We plan to read one line for one book. For each line we read, the first `string` corresponds to ISBN, the second title, the third author, the rest we don't care, if any.

 *See revised `lp-07-42.cpp` for implementation.*