#### Chapter 6 Functions

##### 6.1 Function Basics

A function call does two things:

1. It initializes the function's parameters from the corresponding arguments, and

2. it transfers control to that function.

Execution of the *calling* function is suspended and execution of the *called* function begins.

The `return` statement does two things:

1. It returns the value (if any) in the `return`, and
2. it transfers control out of the *called* function back to the *calling* function.

The value returned by the function is used to initialize the result of the call expression.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> void foo(int a, int b)
> {
> 	cout << a << " " << b << endl;
> }
> int main()
> {
> 	int i {};
> 	foo(++i, i++);
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

Undefined.

*Order of evaluation is not guaranteed in the list of arguments.*

> What is a local static object?

A local object whose lifetime continues across the calls. It is initialized before the execution passes through it and not destroyed until the program terminates.

> Say you have designed a recursive, divide-and-conquer algorithm. How would you track the number of function calls for one instance?

Count with a static local variable in the function.

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> int static a, b;
> ```
>
> Is `b` a static local variable?

Yes.

> We may declare a function but not define it so long as we do not use it. But there is an exception. What is it?

A virtual function must always be defined.

> Why is it a best practice to put function declarations in the header rather than in the source file?

If the interface to the function changes, we need to change only one declaration.

*By including the header in the source file that defines the function, the compiler helps to verify if the declaration and the definition are consistent.*

##### 6.2 Argument Passing

In C++, argument passing can be divided into two categories:

1. pass by reference
2. pass by value.

Passing a pointer is still passing by value, only that the pointer has indirect access to the object outside the function. However, passing by reference is totally different. Consider a fragment of code

```c++
int a = 3;
foo(a);
```

It cannot be told from the caller side whether `a` is passed by reference or by value. Suppose the prototype of `foo` is `T foo(int &)`, the argument is passed by reference.

In C++, programmers generally use reference parameters to access objects outside a function, because

1. they are less error-prone than pointers;
2. they avoid copying, which may be expensive;
3. some types such as IO types cannot be copied, thus cannot be passed by value.

A smart way to return additional information is to use reference parameters.

> Which of the following function prototype(s) fit function call `len("Hello")`?
>
> 1. `size_t len(string s);`
> 2. `size_t len(string & s);`
> 3. `size_t len(const string & s);`

Prototype 1 and 3

> Defining a reference parameter that we do not change as a plain reference is a common mistake. Why do we call the effect of this mistake "pervasive"?

Doing so prevents the caller to pass `const` objects, and literals that are possible to bind to reference-to-const. Moreover, any other function that correctly defines its parameters as reference-to-const may fail to call this function.

> What is passed to function `print` given
>
> ```c++
> void print(const int a[10]);
> ```

`const int *`

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> void print(initializer_list<string> lst)
> {
> 	for (const auto & str : lst)
> 		cout << str << " ";
> }
> ```
>
> Is it legal if we omit `const`? If so, what would be the difference?

Yes. No difference.

*Elements in an `initializer_list<T>` are `const` automatically. This top-level `const` translates into low-level `const` in the type deduction by `auto &`. So even if we omitted `const`, the type of `str` would still be `const string &`.*

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> void append(vector<string> & v, string & s)
> {	v.push_back(s); }
>
> int main()
> {
> 	string str = "Hello";
> 	vector<string> vec;
> 	append(vec, str);
> 	vec[0] = "World";
> 	cout << str << endl;
>     return 0;
> }
> ```

Hello

##### 6.3 Return Types and the `return` Statement

Function return type deduction has been supported since C++14. It is legal to write

```c++
auto abs(int a)
{	return a >= 0 ? a : -1 * a; }
```

In C++11, this has to be written with trailing return type as

```c++
auto abs(int a) -> int
{	return a >= 0 ? a : -1 * a; }
```

> Parentheses are generally considered "harmless". Can we add a pair of parentheses to the return type of a function declaration like

```c++
(int)foo();
```
No.

> An empty block `{}` is equivalent to a null statement `;`. Can we replace the `;` at the end of a function declaration with a `{}` so that `void foo();` becomes `void foo(){}`?

No. It then becomes a function definition.


> A fragment of code shows
>
> ```c++
> void foo()
> {
> 	// ...
> 	return boo();
> }
> ```
>
> Isn't it illegal for a function with `void` return type to return anything?

It can be legal so long as  function `boo()` returns `void` type, too.

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> string & longer_of(string s, string t)
> {	return s.size() > t.size() ? s : t; }
> ```

It returns a reference to an object local to the function.

> Can a function call appear on the left-hand side of an assignment? If so, give an example.

Yes, if that function returns a reference.

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::string;

string & longer_of(string & s, string & t)
{
	return s.size() > t.size() ? s : t;
}

int main()
{
	string s = "short", t = "tall";
	longer_of(s, t) = "long";
	cout << s << " " << t << endl;
 	return 0;
}
```

##### 6.4 Overloaded Functions

> Is the following program legal? If yes, what's its output? If no, why not?
>
> ```c++
> void f() { cout << "void" << endl;}
> void f(int) {cout << "int" << endl;}
>
> int main()
> {
>     void f(int);
>     f();
>     return 0;
> }
> ```

No, it's illegal, because the declaration of `void f(int);` *hides* rather than *overloads* `f()` that is defined in the outer scope. In C++, name lookup happens before type checking. That is, the compiler finds only one function  `f()` in the scope and then stops. Then it performs the type checking and concludes that the argument is too few (0 provided, but 1 asked for).

> Give an example of an overloaded standard library function which has two versions: one for const members, and the other for non-const members.

`v.begin()`, assuming `v` is a `vector<T>`.

- If `v` is a non-const `vector<T>`, `v.begin()` returns a `vector<T>::iterator`.
- If `v` is a const `vector<T>`, `v.begin()` returns a `vector<T>::const_iterator`.

> Is it possible to define a function inside a function?

Not for ordinary functions. C++11 introduced lambdas. For example,

```c++
int main()
{
	auto foo = []{return 42;};
	cout << foo() << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

*You may further wonder what on earth the type of `foo` is. It's a unique, unnamed class type.*

Since C++ supports local classes, there is a workaround, which looks bizarre though.

```c++
int main()
{
	class Foo
	{ public: static int foo() { return 42; } };
	cout << Foo::foo() << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

> Consider a function that takes and returns references-to-const
>
> ```c++
> const T & foo(const S &);
> ```
>
> Write its overloaded function such that when taking a plain reference, it returns a plain reference.

```c++
T & foo(S & s)
{	return const_cast<T &>(foo(const_cast<const S &>(s))); }
```

##### 6.5 Features for Specialized Uses

Default arguments: Can only omit trailing arguments.

C++ has largely relaxed the restrictions on a `constexpr`. The principle though is unchanged: A `constexpr` function is computed during compile time and not during execution, as long as the value being passed to it as a parameter is a constant.

> What could be the problem with the following function declaration?
>
> ```c++
> void foo(int a = 42, int b, char c);
> ```
>

Because we can only omit trailing arguments, if we had supplied a default argument for a parameter, we would have to supply default arguments for all the parameters following it.

*The general principle is to put the parameter that you are most likely to change first, and the one you are least likely to change last.*

> A fragment of code shows
>
> ```c++
> void foo(int a = 42, int b, char c);
> ```
>
> However, the compiler is okay with it. How is this possible?

If there were another declaration preceding it, which had specified the default arguments for `b` and `c`, then it would be okay. For example,

```c++
void foo(int a, int b = 24, char c = 'c');
```

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> constexpr int foo(int a)
> {	return a * a; }
>
> int main()
> {
> 	int a;
> 	cin >> a;
> 	cout << foo(a) << endl;
>     return 0;
> }
> ```
>
> `foo` is defined to a `constexpr` function, but the value return by `foo(a)` is not unknown until run time. Why wouldn't the compiler complain?

Every `constexpr` function stands for two versions. When the parameter is not a constant expression, the value returned is not so, either. The reason for such design is to avoid redundancy if we had to write a function twice: one for constant expressions and one for other variables.

##### 6.6 Function Matching

Three possible outcomes of function matching (also known as *overload resolution*):

1. best match
2. no match
3. ambiguous call

Three steps of function matching:

1. candidate functions
2. viable functions
3. best match

Ranks of conversions:

1. exact match

   1. identical
   2. array-to-pointer or function-to-pointer
   3. top-level const

2. const conversion

3. integral promotion

4. arithmetic/pointer conversion

5. class-type conversion

> Which version of `foo` is called for `foo('a')`?
>
> ```c++
> void foo(int);
> void foo(short);
> ```

`void foo(int);`

> Which version of `foo` is called for `foo(42)`?
>
> ```c++
> void foo(long);
> void foo(long long);
> ```

Ambiguous call.

*Arithmetic conversion is equivalent to each other. `long` is not considered any closer to `int` than `long long`.*

> Which version of `foo` is called for `foo(0, 0, .0)`?
>
> ```c++
> void foo(int, int, int);
> void foo(double, double, double);
> ```

Ambiguous call.

##### 6.7 Pointers to Functions

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> #include <type_traits>
> void foo(){}
> int main()
> {
> 	auto p = foo;
> 	auto q = &foo;
> 	auto &r  =foo;
> 	decltype(foo) s;
> 	decltype(foo) *t;
> 	std::cout << is_same<decltype(p), decltype(q)>() << " "
> 			 << is_same<decltype(r), decltype((s))>() << " "
>         	  << is_same<decltype(s), decltype(t)>() << std::endl;
>     return 0;
> }
> ```

1 1 0

*`p` `q` `t` have pointer-to-function type. `r` has reference-to-function type. `s` has function type.*

> What's the advantage and disadvantage of using a reference to function, compared with using a pointer to function?

Advantage: A reference only refer to a valid object/function.

Disadvantage: Cannot have an array of references.

> Declare a pointer that points to a function which takes and returns a pointer to function, both of which take and return an `int`.

```c++
int(*(*p)(int (*)(int)))(int);
```

For example,

```c++
#include <iostream>
int f(int) { return 42; }
int (*foo(int (*)(int)))(int) {	return &f; }
int main()
{
	int (*(*p)(int(*)(int)))(int) = &foo;
	std::cout << (*(*p)(&f))(0) << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

