18/02/14 = Wed

**Exercise 12.8:** Explain what if anything is wrong with the following function.

```c++
bool b() {
	int* p = new int;
	// ...
	return p;
}
```

**Answer:** Memory leak after `p` is converted from `int *` to `bool`.

**Exercise 12.9:** Explain what happens in the following code:

```c++
int *q = new int(42), *r = new int(100);
r = q;
auto q2 = make_shared<int>(42), r2 = make_shared<int>(100);
r2 = q2;
```

**Answer:** 

1. `q` and `r` point to two dynamically allocated `int` objects, which have values 42 and 100 respectively
2. `r` is assigned with the address in `q`, which causes a memory leak, as no pointer now points to the dynamically allocated `int` with value 100
3. `q2` and `r2` are shared pointers that point to two dynamically allocated `int` objects, which have values 42 and 100 respectively
4. `r2` is assigned with the address in `q2` -- since no shared pointer now points to the `int` with value 100, that object, previously pointed to by `r2`, is destroyed and the related memory is freed.


**Exercise 12.10:** Explain whether the following call to the `process` function defined on *page 464* is correct. If not, how would you correct the call?

```c++
// ptr is created and initialized when process is called
void process(shared_ptr<int> ptr)
{	// use ptr
} 	// ptr goes out of scope and is destroyed
```

```c++
shared_ptr<int> p(new int(42));
process(shared_ptr<int>(p));
```

**Answer:** Correct but redundant. Could be made simpler

```c++
auto p = make_shared<int>(42);
process(p);
```

**Exercise 12.11:** What would happen if we called `process` as follows?

```c++
process(shared_ptr<int>(p.get()));
```

**Answer:** A disaster. When `process` returns, the object to which `p` pointed is destroyed, invalidating `p`.

**Exercise 12.12:** Using the declarations of `p` and `sp` explain each of the following calls to process. If the call is legal, explain what it does. If the call is illegal, explain why:

```c++
auto p = new int();
auto sp = make_shared<int>();
```

(a) `process(sp);`

(b) `process(new int());`

(c) `process(p);`

(d) `process(shared_ptr<int>(p))`

**Answer:** 

(a) legal, passing `sp`, a `shared_ptr<int>`, to `process` as argument

(b) illegal, since the constructor of `shared_ptr<int>(int *)` is `explicit`

(c) illegal, since the constructor of `shared_ptr<int>(int *)` is `explicit`

(d) legal, passing a temporary `shared_ptr<int>`, which is initialized from `p`, to `process` as argument

**Exercise 12.13:** What happens if we execute the following code?

```c++
auto sp = make_shared<int>();
auto p = sp.get();
delete p;
```

**Answer:** `sp` would be invalidated. When `sp` goes out of scope, the program will have an undefined behavior as it tries to delete an object that has been destroyed.