#### Chapter 12 Dynamic Memory

| stack memory                                                 | static memory                                                | dynamic memory (heap)                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| locally defined automatic objects                            | local `static` objects, class `static` members, variables defined outside any function | objects that program dynamically allocate at run time        |
| objects exist while the block in which they are defined is executing | objects are allocated before the first use, destroyed when the program ends | program has control over objects' lifetimes; objects are not destroyed until explicitly told so |

#####12.1 Dynamic Memory and Smart Pointers

Smart pointer types:

1. `shared_ptr`
2. `unique_ptr`

> When do we need to use dynamic memory?

1. when we don't know how many objects until run time;
2. when we don't know the precise type of objects until run time;
3. when we want to share data between several objects.

> What does it mean by modifying a local variable with `staitc`?
>
> What does it mean by modifying a global variable with `static`?

Internal `static` and external `static` are so different that they should be seen as two unrelated terms.

- A `static` local variable is initialized before its first use, and not destroyed until program ends. A `static` local variable provides private, permanent storage within a function.
- A `static` on a global variable or a function is also called *file* `static`. Such a `static` makes the global variable or the function invisible to the linker, thus to other source files. The use of *file* `staitc` is inherited from C. In C++, unnamed namespace, which has the same effect, should be preferred.

> There are antithetically two common types of mistakes when using multiple pointers to manage one dynamic object. One is memory leak. What's the other one?

Too hastily `delete` a dynamically allocated object via a pointer, while there are other pointers still using the object.

1. using an object after it has been deleted
2. deleting the same memory twice

It's advised to make a pointer null after the delete.

*Memory leak happens when you forget to delete a dynamically allocated object when there is no pointer pointing to the object.*

> Where is `unique_ptr` defined?

`<memory>`

> What is a `weak_ptr`?

A weak reference to an object managed by a `shared_ptr`.

> What is the output of 
>
> ```c++
> int i = 42;
> {
>     auto p = make_shared<int>(i);
> }
> cout << i << endl;
> ```

42

> What are the types of `p1`, `p2` and `p3` as in
>
> ```c++
> auto p1 = new auto("auto");
> auto p2 = new const auto("auto");
> const auto p3 = new const auto("auto");
> ```

| `p1`            | `p2`                 | `p3`                      |
| --------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `const char **` | `const char *const*` | `const char *const*const` |

> Are the following lines legal?
>
> ```c++
> int *p = new int(42);
> delete p;
> p = new int(24);
> delete p;
> ```

Yes. `delete p;` destroys the object to which `p` points, but does nothing to `p` itself.

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> shared_ptr<int> clone(int p)
> {
>     return new int(p);
> }
> ```

The `shared_ptr<int>` constructor that takes a built-in pointer is `explicit`. Thus we must explicitly return a `shared_ptr<int>` like

```c++
shared_ptr<int> clone(int p)
{
    return shared_ptr<int>(new int(p));
}
```

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> #include <memory>
> using namespace std;
> void process(shared_ptr<int> p)
> {
>     cout << p.use_count() << endl;
> }
> int main()
> {
>     process(shared_ptr<int>(new int));
> }
> ```
>

1

*As a result of copy elision.*

> Given `p` is a `shared_ptr`, what does the following conditional statement do?
>
> ```c++
> if (!p.unique())
>     p.reset(new int(*p));
> ```

Check whether `p` is the only user of the object to which it points. If not, then allocate a new copy before making any changes, so as not to affect other users of the object.

> Let `u` and `v` be two `unique_ptr<T>`. Exchange the ownership of `u` and `v`.

```c++
swap(u, v);
```

> Let `u` and `v` be two `unique_ptr<T>`. Transfer ownership from `u` to `v`.

```c++
v.reset(u.release());
```

> Given `p` is a `unique_ptr`, what's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> p.release();
> ```

Memory leak. Use `p.reset();` instead.

##### 12.2 Dynamic Arrays

Whenever we need a dynamic array, first consider if we can do with a `vector`, which is safer and faster.

> Can we use a range for on a dynamic array?

No, because when we use `new` to allocate an array, we do not get an object with array type. Rather, we get a pointer to the element type of the array.

> What's the problem with the following line?
>
> ```c++
> int p = new int(10);
> delete [] p;
> ```

By supplying `()` rather than `[]` after `new int`, only one `int` rather than an `int` array is dynamically allocated. To delete it, use `delete`, rather than `delete []`.

> Define a `shared_ptr` to manage a dynamic array of 10 `int`s.

```c++
shared_ptr<int> sptr(new int[10], [](int * p){ delete [] p; })
```

> Can we use `new` to dynamically allocate an array of a class type which has no default constructor?

No.

> What's the fundamental difference between `new` and the `allocator` class?

`new` combines allocating memory with constructing object(s) in that memory, while the `allocator` class decouples construction from memory allocation.

> What's the advantage that the `allocator` class enjoys overs using `new`?

The `allocator` class can be used to allocate memory for classes that do not have default constructors.

> What does `uninitialized_copy` return?

An iterator to the one past the last element of the destination sequence.

##### 12.3 Using the Library: A Text-Query Program

