18/03/14 = Wed

**Exercise 14.50:** Show the possible class-type conversion sequences for the initializations of `ex1` and `ex2`. Explain whether the initializations are legal or not.

```c++
struct LongDouble {
    LongDouble(double = 0.0);
    operator double();
    operator float();
};
LongDouble ldObj;
int ex1 = ldObj;
float ex2 = ldObj;
```

**Answer:** 

- For `ex1` it is possible to call either `LongDouble::operator double()` or `LongDouble::operator float()`. The initialization is illegal because the call is ambiguous.
- For `ex2` `LongDouble::operator float()` is an exact match. The initialization is legal.

**Exercise 14.51:** Show the conversion sequences (if any) needed to call each version of `calc` and explain why the best viable function is selected.

```c++
void calc(int);
void calc(LongDouble);
double dval;
calc(dval); // which calc?
```

**Answer:** `calc` is overloaded. The conversion from `double` to `int` is arithmetic, which is in the 4th rank of conversion. Meanwhile, the constructor of `LongDouble` defines an implicit conversion from `double` to the class. This is in the 5th rank of conversion. Therefore, the `calc(dval)` will call the version whose parameter is `int`.

**Exercise 14.52:** Which `operator+`, if any, is selected for each of the addition expressions? List the candidate functions, the viable functions, and the type conversions on the arguments for each viable function:

```c++
struct LongDouble {
    // member operator+ for illustration purposes; + is usually a nonmember
    LongDouble operator+(const SmallInt&);
    // other members as in ยง 14.9.2 (p. 587)
};
LongDouble operator+(LongDouble&, double);
SmallInt si;
LongDouble ld;
ld = si + ld;
ld = ld + si;
```

```c++
class SmallInt {
    friend
    SmallInt operator+(const SmallInt&, const SmallInt&);
public:
    SmallInt(int = 0);                   // conversion from int
    operator int() const { return val; } // conversion to int
private:
    std::size_t val;
};
```

**Answer:** 

- For `ld = si + ld;` 
  - candidate functions: 
    1. built-in `+`
    2. `LongDouble operator+(LongDouble&, double);`
  - viable functions:
    1. built-in `+`: `si` to `int` then to `float`, `ld` to `float`
    2. built-in `+`: `si` to `int` then to `double`, `ld` to `double`
  - best match:
    - none (ambiguous overload)
- For `ld = ld + si;` 
  - candidate functions: 
    1. built-in `+`
    2. `LongDouble::operator+(const SmallInt&);`
    3. `LongDouble operator+(LongDouble&, double);`
  - viable functions:
    1. built-in `+`: `ld` to `float`, `si` to `int` then to `float`
    2. built-in `+`: `ld` to `double`, `si` to `int` then to `double`
    3. `LongDouble::operator+(const SmallInt&);`: exact match, no conversion needed
    4. `LongDouble operator+(LongDouble&, double);`: `si` to `int` then to `double`
  - best match:
    - `LongDouble::operator+(const SmallInt&);`

**Exercise 14.53:** Given the definition of `SmallInt` on *page 588*, determine whether the following addition expression is legal. If so, what addition operator is used? If not, how might you change the code to make it legal?

```c++
SmallInt s1;
double d = s1 + 3.14;
```

```c++
class SmallInt {
    friend
    SmallInt operator+(const SmallInt&, const SmallInt&);
public:
    SmallInt(int = 0);                   // conversion from int
    operator int() const { return val; } // conversion to int
private:
    std::size_t val;
};
```

**Answer:** No. There are two equally good (or equally bad) conversion paths:

1. The built-in `operator+` is used. `s1` is converted to `int` then to `double`, then is added with `3.14`, which is a `double`.
2. `SmallInt::operator+(const SmallInt&, const SmallInt&)` is used. `3.14` is truncated to `int`, then is converted to `SmallInt`, and then is added to `s1`.

To force the first conversion path:

```c++
double d = static_cast<double>(s1) + 3.14;
```

To force the second conversion path:

```c++
double d = s1 + SmallInt(3.14);
```

An additional question is: *Can we make any change to the definition of `SmallInt` so that the addition expression is legal?*

```c++
double d = s1 + 3.14;
```

To force the first conversion path, or equivalently to forbid the second path, we have to prevent an `int` from being converted to `SmallInt`. By declaring the conversion constructor `explicit` , we can achieve this.

To force the second conversion path, or equivalently to forbid the first path, we have to prevent, conversely, a `SmallInt` from being converted to an `int`. We may consider removing the conversion operator to `int` in the class definition. However, doing so will make the assignment illegal.