#### Chapter 3 Strings, Vectors, and Arrays

> Why are `string` and `vector` important?

Most frequently used library types. Variable-size containers. Abstractions of the more primitive built-in array type.

| container    | `string` | `vector`                |
| ------------ | -------- | ----------------------- |
| element type | `char`   | object of the same type |

##### 3.1 Namespace `using` Declarations

> Scope operator `::` is of top precedence. It is used to denote
>
> 1. global scope;
> 2. namespace scope; and
> 3. ?

class scope

> Why should we avoid `using` declarations in headers?

Unexpected name conflicts.

> Can we write `using std::cout, std::endl;`?

Yes since C++17.

#####3.2 Library `string` Type

Assume the ASCII code is used in what follows. That is, 32 for `blank`, 48 for `0`, 65 for `A`, 97 for `a`.

> What is the output of `cout << string(2, 65) << endl;`?

`AA`

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> void print(string s){ cout << s << endl; }
> int main()
> {
>     print({100, 'c'});
>     return 0;
> }
> ```

`dc`

> ```c++
> char ca[] = "hello";
> string sa(ca);
> string sl("hello");
> ```
>
> What is the length of `ca[]`? What is `strlen(ca)`? What is `sa.size()`? What is `sl.size()`?

6 5 5 5

> What is the return type of `getline(cin, str)`?

`std::istream &`

> Is `<` defined for `string`? If so, how to compare? Try compare "Hi", "Hello", and "Hello, World".

Yes. Compare by value. `s1 == s2` if and only if they have exactly the same values. If `s2` can be written as `s1 + s3` for some nonempty `s3`, then `s1 < s2`. Vice versa. Otherwise, the result is determined by the first character at which `s1` and `s2` differ.

"Hello" < "Hello, World" < "Hi"

> Let `s1` and `s2` be two strings. Does `s1 == s2` have the same meaning in C++ and Java?

No. In C++, `s1 == s2` tests for value equality.  In Java, it tests for reference equality. The Java equivalent of `s1 == s2` in C++ is `s1.equals(s2)`.

> ```c++
> char cstr[] = "Hello";
> string sstr = "World";
> ```
>
> Is `string sstr2(cstr);` legal?
>
> Is `char cstr2[] = sstr;` legal?
>
> Is `sstr = cstr;` legal?
>
> Is `cstr = sstr;` legal?
>
> If not, how to fix it?

Yes. No. Yes. No.

- We cannot initialize a `char[6]` as a copy of a `string`. The only ways to initialize a `char [6]` are:

  - default initialize `char cstr2[6];`
  - list initialize `char cstr2[] = {'W', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '\0'};`
  - initialize from a string literal `char cstr2[] = "World";`

- A workaround. To initialize a `char const  *` from a `string`:

  ```c++
  char const * pc = sstr.c_str(); 					// or just auto pc = sstr.c_str();
  ```
  *`sstr.c_str()` returns a `const char *`.*

- To copy the contents of a `string` to a `char [6]` :

  ```c++
  std::copy(sstr.begin(), sstr.end(), begin(cstr));	// the last argument can be just cstr
  ```

  Or use the traditional C function in `<cstring>`:

  ```c++
  std::strcpy(cstr, sstr.c_str());
  ```
  *Programmer must make sure `cstr[]` is large enough to store values of `sstr`.*

> Given `string s0;` Is `string s1 = s0 + '1' + '2';` legal? What about `string s2 = "2" + "3" + s0;`? What about `string s3 = "3" "4" + s0;`?

Yes. No. Yes.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> char ca[] = "hello";
> for (auto &c : ca)
> 	toupper(c);
> cout << ca << endl;
> ```
>

hello

> Where is `isgraph` defined? What does `isgraph(c)` do? What does `isprint(c)` do? What does `iscntrl(c)` do?

`<cctype>` .  Tell if `c` is a graphic (i.e. printable non-whitespace) character. Tell if `c` is a printable character. Tell if `c` is a control character.

*For ASCII, 0-31 and 127 represent control characters, and 32-126 represent printable characters. The only printable character that is not graphic is 32, which is space.*

> What is a Windows-style newline? What is a Unix-style newline?

|                     | Windows                     | Unix      |
| ------------------- | --------------------------- | --------- |
| Name                | carriage return + line feed | line feed |
| Abbreviation        | CR + LF                     | LF        |
| Escape character(s) | \r\n                        | \n        |

> ```c++
> string s;
> decltype(s.size()) index;
> ```
>
> What is the type of `index`?

`std::string::size_type`, an unsigned integer type guaranteed to hold the size of any large `string`.

#####3.3 Library `vector` Type

> How to initialize a `vecotr` from an array?

Let `a` be an array of `int`.

```c++
std::vector<int> vec(std::begin(a), std::end(a));
```

*`std::begin()` and `std::end()` are defined in `<iterator>`.*

> What is the form of initialization if we supply only a size to a `vector`?

Value initialization.

> What is in `vec` given `vector<int> vec(42);`? What if `vector<int> vec = 42;`?

42 zeros. Compilation error.

> Is `vector<string> vec = { 10, "10" };` legal? Is it list initialization?

Yes. No.
*For curly braces, try list initialization first. If not possible, try other ways.*

> `vector<int> vint {10}; vector<string> vstr {10};`
>
> How many elements are there in `vint`, `vstr`?

1 10.

> Why cannot we use a range for if the body of the loop adds elements to the `vector`?

Because the value of `vec.end()` is cached and will be invalidated if we change the size of the `vector`.

> Let `v` be a `vector` of `int`. What is the type of `v.size()`?

`std::vector<int>::size_type`

> Is `<` defined for a `vector`?

Yes if `<` is properly defined for its elements.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> vector<int> vec;
> cout << vec[0];
> ```

Undefined.

> ```c++
> vector<int> vec(3);
> vec = {1, 2, 3, 4};
> ```
> Is there any problem?

No.

##### 3.4 Introducing Iterators

> What does it tell by `v.begin() == v.end()`?

`v` is empty.

> What's the problem with the following function? How to fix it?
>
> ```c++
> void capitalize(string & str)
> {
> 	auto it = str.begin();
>   	*it = toupper(*it);
> }
> ```

 If `str` is empty, dereferencing `it` would be undefined.

```c++
void capitalize(string & str)
{
    if (!str.empty()) {
        auto it = str.begin();
        *it = toupper(*it);
    }
}
```

> Is `+=` generally defined for all the iterators?

No.

> Is `+=` defined for `string` and `vector`?

Yes.

> How is `string::begin()` overloaded?

```c++
std::string::const_iterator std::string::begin() const;
std::string::iterator std::string::begin();
```

> What is the type of `it1 - it2` given they are iterators of `vector<int>`?

`std::vector<int>::difference_type`, a signed integer type.

> Use a for loop to print the first half of a `vector<int>`, excluding the mid-point if there is one.

```c++
auto mid = v.begin() + v.size() / 2;
for (auto it = v.begin(); it != mid; ++it)
	cout << *it << " ";
```

##### 3.5 Arrays

> What is `a` as in `int *a[10];`?

An array of 10 pointers to `int`.

*Subscript operator `[]` is only lower than scope operator `::` in precedence.*

> Is `int a[get_size()]` legal?

Yes only if `get_size()` is a `constexpr`. That is, its value is known at compile time.

> ```c++
> int a[10];
> int b[10] {};
> ```
>
> Is there any difference between `a` and `b`?

- Array `a` is *default* initialized. If `a` is inside any function, then the values are undefined.
- Array `b` is *list* initialized. The dimension (10) is greater than the number of initializers (0). The rest 10 elements are *value* initialized to have value zero. Thus `b` has 10 zeros.

> What is an array-to-pointer conversion (also known as *array decaying*) ?

In most cases when we use the name of an array, we are really using a pointer to the first element of the array. This is a conversion that the compiler does automatically. For example, when we pass the name of an array by value, what we really pass is a pointer to the first element.

The implication is a loss of dimension (size of the array). For example, the function that accepts the name of the array knows nothing about its dimension.

There are cases where array-to-pointer conversion does not occur. For example:

1. when the name of the array is passed by reference;
2. when the name of the array is the argument of `decltype()`;
3. when the name of the array is the argument of address-of `&` operator;
4. when the name of the array is the argument of `sizeof` operator;
5. when string literal is used to initialize an array.

In what follows, assume`int a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4};`.

To see case 1, consider

```c++
template<typename T, size_t N> size_t constexpr asizeof(T const (&a)[N]) { return N; }
```

 `asizeof(a)` would correctly returns 4.

Also consider

```c++
int m[2][2] = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}};
for (auto const& row : m) {
    for (auto elem : row)
        cout << elem << " ";
    cout << endl;
}
```

We must have `&`  for `row`. Otherwise, `row` would decay from an `int [2]` to an `int *`, and `elem` would fail to know its size.

For case 2, know that `decltype(a) b = {4, 5, 6};` is legal, and `b` would be an `int [4] `  whose last element has value 0.

For case 3, note that a pointer to array is different from a pointer to the first element of an array.

For case 4, know that `sizeof a / size a[0]` would correctly returns 4.

For case 5, note that in `char c[] = "Hello";` `c` would correctly deduce the size from the string literal.

> Suppose we have `int a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4};`.
>
> Can we initialize another `int` array as a copy of it?
>
> Can we copy the contents from `a`  to `b` given `int b[4];`?

We cannot initialize an array as a copy of another array.

We cannot use `=` to copy from one array to another either.

To copy in the modern C++ manner:

```C++
#include <algorithm>
#include <iterator>
std::copy(std::begin(a), std::end(a), std::begin(b));	// the last argument can be just b
```
To copy in the traditional C manner:

```c++
#include <cstring>
std::memcpy(b, a, sizeof a);
```

*The weird rules about arrays are inherited from 1970's C programming and nobody has ever changed them because too much existing code would break.*

> Where is `std::size_t` defined?

`<cstddef>`

> Assume `a` is an `int [10]`. Is `int * p = &a[10];` legal?

Yes.

> Assume `a` is an `int [10]`. What is the return type of `begin(a)` ?

`int *`

> Compare `difference_type` with `ptrdiff_t`. Give an expression that yields a `ptrdiff_t`.

- `difference_type` is defined for `string` and `vector`. It is a signed integral type to represent the difference between two iterators.
- `ptrdiff_t` is defined for pointers. A signed integral type to represent the difference between two pointers. `end(a) - begin(a)` yields a `ptrdiff_t` given `a` is an array.

> ```c++
> int a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4};
> auto p = end(a);
> cout << p[-2] << endl;
> ```
>
> Is `p[-2]` legal? If so, what is the output?

Yes. 3.

> ```c++
> int a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4};
> cout << 2[a] << endl;
> ```
>
> Is `2[a]` legal? If so, what is the output?

Yes. 3.

*The index of built-in subscript operator `[]` can have negative value, so long as it is meaningful. In contrast, `string` and `vector` must have unsigned type in `[]`.*

> What is the type of string literal `"hello"`? What is the type of `s` as in `auto s = "hello";`?

`char const [6]` `char const *`

*The difference arises as a result of array-to-pointer conversion.*

> ```c++
> char ca[] = "hello";
> auto cb = "hello";
> ```
>
> Is there any difference between `ca` and `cb`?

`ca` is a `char [6]`.

`cb` is a `char const *`.

`ca[0] = 'H';` is okay.

`cb[0] = 'H';` is an error (*assignment of read-only location*).

| String Literal and Declaration With It | Type             |
| -------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| `"hi"`                                 | `char const [3]` |
| `char ca[] = "hi"`                     | `char [3]`       |
| `auto cb = "hi"`                       | `char const *`   |
| `string str = "hi"`                    | `string`         |
| `auto cstr = string("hi").c_str()`     | `char const *`   |

> What's the problem with the following line? How to fix it?
>
> ```c++
> char ca[7] = "Lippman";
> ```

`ca` does not have enough space to hold the string literal, which terminates with a null character. To fix it, write `char ca[8] = "Lippman";` or just `char ca[] = "Lippman";`

> What is the output of `cout << strlen("hello") << endl;`?

5

> What does `strcpy(p1, p2)` do?

It copies the null-terminated character array whose first element is pointed to by `p2` to the character array whose first element is pointed by `p1`.

*`<cstring>` functions typically put destination before source in the argument list.*

> What if the array pointed to by `p1` is not large enough for `strcat(p1, p2)` ?

Can be disaster.

##### 3.6 Multidimensional Arrays

> What is in `int m[3][3] = { 1, 2, 3 };`?

A 3-by-3 matrix which has 1, 2, 3 in the first row and 0 in other places.

> What is in `int m[3][3] = { {1}, {2}, {3} };`?

A 3-by-3 matrix which has 1, 2, 3 in the first column and 0 in other places.

> You want to write
> ```c++
> int m[2][2] = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}};
> for (auto const& row : m) {
>     for (auto elem : row)
>         cout << elem << " ";
>     cout << endl;
> }
> ```
>
> Unfortunately, your cannot type `&` since the key is broken. How would make up for it?

Replace `auto const&` with `decltype(m[0]) const`

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> int m[3][3] = {};
> int ** p = m;
> ```

`m` is the name of an array of array. After array-to-pointer conversion, `m` becomes a pointer to the first element of the array of array. The first element is an `int` array of 4. Thus `m` decays into a pointer to `int` array of 4. This is incompatible with a pointer to a pointer to `int`.

> ```c++
> int m[3][3] = {};
> auto p = m;
> ```
>
> Explicitly spell out the type of `p` to replace `auto`.

```c++
int (*p)[3] = m;
```

*Note the parentheses cannot be omitted.*

> Write a function to print out any matrix represented by a 2-dimensional array.

```c++
template<typename T, size_t M, size_t N>
void mprint(T const (&m)[M][N])
{
	for (auto &row : m) {
		for (auto elem : row)
			cout << elem <<  " ";
		cout << endl;
	}
}
```

