18/01/31 = Wed

**Exercise 2.19:** Explain the key differences between pointers and references.

**Answer:**

| references                               | pointers                                 |
| ---------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| not an object, just an alias             | an object by itself                      |
| must be initialized on definition; cannot rebind | may not be initialized on definition; may point to different objects over its lifetime |

**Exercise 2.20:** What does the following program do?

```c++
int i = 42;
int *p1 = &i;
*p1 = *p1 * *p1;
```

**Answer:** 

Define an `int` whose name is `i`, and initialize it with value 42.

Define a pointer to `int` whose name is `p1`, and initialize it with the address of `i`.

Access `i` via `p1`. Assign to `i` the value of itself getting squared, which is 42 x 42 = 1764.

**Exercise 2.21:** Explain each of the following definitions. Indicate whether
any are illegal and, if so, why.

`int i = 0;`

(a) `double* dp = &i;`

(b) `int *ip = i;`

(c) `int *p = &i;`

**Answer:** 

(a) Illegal. Type of a pointer must match with the object that it points. Here `double *` mismatch with `int`.

(b) Illegal. Cannot initialize an `int *` with `int`. No such conversion.

(c) Legal. Define a pointer to `int` whose name is `p`, and initialize it with the address of `i`.

**Exercise 2.22:** Assuming `p` is a pointer to `int`, explain the following code:

```c++
if (p) // ...
if (*p) // ...
```

**Answer:**

`if (p)` checks whether `p` points to any object. The condition is true if and only if `p` is not a null pointer.

`if (*p)` evaluates `*p` and uses it as a condition.

- If `*p` is a `bool`, then the condition is true when `*p` is `true`, and vice versa.
- If `*p` is an arithmetic type, then the condition is true when `*p` is not zero, and false otherwise.

**Exercise 2.23:** Given a pointer `p`, can you determine whether `p` points to a valid object? If so, how? If not, why not?

**Answer:** No. What is stored in `p` is a memory address. It is impossible to tell, from the memory address itself, that whether the pointer is valid or not.

**Exercise 2.24:** Why is the initialization of `p` legal but that of `lp` illegal?

`int i = 42;  void *p = &i;   long *lp = &i;`

**Answer:** `void *` is a special kind of pointer, which may hold the address of any object. Apart from it, any pointer must match with the object to which it points, with only two exceptions [^1][^2]. Here `lp` is a pointer to `long`, which mismatches with the type of `i`, which is `int`.

[^1]: a pointer-to-const may point to a non-const object
[^2]: a pointer to a base type may point to an object of a type that is derived from that base type

**Exercise 2.25:** Determine the types and values of each of the following variables.

(a) `int* ip, i, &r = i;`

(b) `int i, *ip = 0;`

(c) `int* ip, ip2;`

**Answer:** In what follows, we assume the variables are define in functions.

(a) `ip` is an `int *` with undefined value; `i` is an `int`, with undefined value; `r` is an `int &` bound to `i`.

(b) `i` is an `int` with undefined value; `ip` is an `int *` whose value is a null pointer.

(c) `ip` is an `int *` with undefined value; `ip2` is an `int` with undefined value.
