#### Chapter 4 Expressions

`()` `[]` `.` `->` are very high in precedence, only lower than scope operator `::`.

Assignment operator `=` and compound assignment operators such as `+=` are very low in precedence, only higher than `throw` and `,`.

The ternary conditional operator `?:` is also very low in precedence. It is only one level higher than assignment operator `=`. Also note that it is right-associative.

Postfix `++` is higher than prefix `++`, which is in the same level as dereference `*` and address-of `&`.

Logical AND `&&` is higher than logical OR `||`.

##### 4.1 Fundamentals

Key Points about lvalue and rvalue:

1. When we use an object's lvalue, we're using its identity (its location in memory).
2. When we use an object's rvalue, we're using its value (its contents).
3. Operators differ as to
   1. whether they require lvalue or rvalue operands, and
   2. whether they return lvalues or rvalues.
4. With one exception in moving objects, we can use an lvalue when an rvalue is required.

Precedence determines how operands are grouped, but it says nothing about the order in which the operands are evaluated.

> Is there any operator that takes three operands? four operands?

Yes. Ternary operator `? : ` takes 3 operands. Function call `()` operator can take any number of operands.

> For each of `<string>`, `<vector>`, and `<iostream>`, list a case where an operator is overloaded.

`+` for a `string`, `[]` for a `vector`, and `<<` for `std::cout`.

>What is the output of
>
>```c++
>int a[] = {1, 3, 5}, p = &a;
>cout << ++*p++ << endl;
>```

2

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> int a = 0;
> cout << a << " " << ++a << endl;
> ```

The order of evaluation is not guaranteed. Thus the output has undefined behavior.

> List four operators that guarantee the order of evaluation.

`&&`  `||`  `?:` `,`

##### 4.2 Arithmetic Operators

> ```c++
> bool b = true;
> bool c = -b;
> ```
>
> What is the value of `c`?

`true`

##### 4.3 Logical and Relational Operators

> What's the difference between `if (val)` and `if (val == true)`?

The former is `true` so long as `val` is a nonzero; the latter is `true` only when `val` is 1.

##### 4.4 Assignment Operators

> What's the difference between `int a;` and `int a {};`?

Assume defined in a function. The former has undefined value. The latter is value initialized to 0.

> Let `i` be an `int`. Is `i = i++ + 1;` legal?

Yes in C++17, which eliminates the possible undefined behavior by clarifying that, for assignment operator `=`, *the right operand is sequenced before the left operand*. Thus it sequences everything that happens in the RHS (*including any side-effects*) before everything that happens in the LHS.

##### 4.5 Increment and Decrement Operators

In precedence, *postfix++* is higher than *++prefix*, while *++prefix* is the same as **dereference*.

> What justifies preferring a prefix increment to a postfix increment?

To use a postfix increment a copy of the original has to be stored. This may affect performance.

> What does `*iter++` do, given `iter` is an iterator?

In effect, it first dereferences `iter`, then increment it to the next element.

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> for (auto it = s.begin(); it != s.end(); )
>     *it = toupper(*it++);
> ```

Answer for C++11: The expression in the body of the loop uses and changes `it`. But the order of evaluation is not guaranteed. Thus the result is undefined.

Answer for C++17: In C++17, it is guaranteed that the RHS of an assignment operator (`=`) is sequenced before the LHS. Thus there would be no ambiguity. However, in the last iteration, `it` would be dereferencing the past-the-end element, which is illegal.

##### 4.6 The Member Access Operators

> Sort by order of precedence: `.` `->` `()` `[]`

They are of the same (*high*) precedence.

##### 4.7 The Conditional Operator

> Does `?:` operator ensure *only one* of the two expressions is evaluated?

Yes.

> For correctness only, do we need any parentheses for
>
> ```c++
> string final_grade = grade >= 90 ? "high pass" : grade >= 60 ? "pass" : "fail";
> ```

No.

> Given `grade` is 59. What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> cout << (grade < 60) ? "fail" : "pass";
> ```

1

##### 4.8 The Bitwise Operators

The related precedence is `~` higher than `<<`  higher than `&` higher than `^` higher than `|`.

> What type(s) do bitwise operators work on?

Integral types.

> Given `quiz` is an `unsigned long`. What does the following line do?
>
> ```c++
> bool status = quiz & 1UL << 27;
> ```

Initialize `status` as `true` if the 27th bit of `quiz` is 1, as `false` if otherwise.

##### 4.9 The `sizeof` Operator

> What is the unit of `sizeof` operator -- in bits or bytes?

Bytes.

> What does the following lines do?
>
> ```c++
> char a[] = "Hello, World!"
> char b[sizeof(a) / sizeof(*a) * 2] {};
> ```

It initializes a `char` array with "Hello, World!", and then defines array twice the size, value initialized with null character.

> Given `const char LETTERS[] = "ABCDF";`, what is the value of `sizeof LETTERS / sizeof (char) - 1`?

5

*Be aware that `LETTERS` ends with a null character.*

##### 4.10 Comma Operator

> What does a comma operator return?

Right-hand expression.

##### 4.11 Type Conversions

- Integral promotion: Integral types smaller than `int` are first promoted to `int` in expressions.
- Preserving precision: Integral to floating-point.
- Converting signedness: Try signed to unsigned first.

A cast is an explicit conversion.

Named Casts:

1. `static_cast<T>`: any well-defined type conversion, other than those involving low-level `const`
2. `const_cast<T>`: cast away `const` only, if possible
3. `reinterpret_cast<T>`: a low-level reinterpretation of the bit pattern
4. `dynamic_cast<T>`: supports run-time type identifications

Old-style Casts:

First try `static_cast` or `const_cast`, if not possible, then try `reinterpret_cast`.

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> auto val = 3 + 4.0;
> ```
>
> What is the type of `val` -- `float` or `double`? How to make `val` a `float`?

`double`. 

```c++
auto val = 3 + 4.0f;
```

> Can any pointer be converted to a `void *` type?

No, only non-const ones. Any pointer can be converted to a `const void *` type.

> What type of named cast should be used to convert a `void *` back to a `T *`?

`static_cast<T *>`

> What type of named cast should be used to convert a `const string *` to a `void *`?

`const_cast<string *>` or, more explicitly, `static_cast<void *>(const_cast_<string *>)`

##### 4.12 Operator Precedence Table

