#### Chapter 2 Variables and Basic Types

> What does it mean by saying that C++ is a statically typed language?

Type checking is done at compile time. The compiler must know the type of every name use in the program.

> Name a programming language that is not statically typed.

Python.

#####2.1 Primitive Built-in Types

> Name a primitive built-in type that is *not* an arithmetic type.

`void`

> In simple words, describe *bit*, *byte*, and *word*.

- **bit**: binary digit, 0 or 1;
- **byte**: the smallest addressable unit of memory, almost always 8 bits today;
- **word**: natural size with which a processor handles data at a time, typically 32 bits or 64 bits.

> Is there a `long long double` built-in type in C++?

No. Just `long long int` and `long double`.

> Are the following statements correct?
>
> - `int` is `signed`
> - `char` is `signed char`
> - `char` is `unsigned char`

Yes. No. No.

*Unlike other types, there are 3 distinct basic character types: `char`, `signed char`, and `unsigned char`. Whether `char` is signed or not depends on the compiler.*

> A `char` is small. It holds only 2^8^ = 256 distinct values. Isn't it good to use `char` for computations that work on only a few small integers?

It is especially a bad practice, since on some machines `char` is signed, while on others is unsigned.

> Why prefer `double` to `float`?

Better precision (more significant digits). Cost is negligible.

> What are the values of `uc` and `sc` as in
>
> ```c++
> unsigned char uc = 256;
> signed char sc = 256;
> ```

0, undefined.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> int a = -1;
> unsigned b = 1;
> cout << a * b << endl;
> ```
>

2^32^ -1, assuming 32-bit `int`.

> What is a literal?

A value whose value is self-evident, such as 42, and "Hello". The type of a literal is determined by its value and form.

> What is the type of a string literal?

`const char [N+1]` where `N` is its length.

> What is the output of 
>
> ```c++
> cout << strlen("Hello" "World") << endl;
> ```

10

> What does escape sequence `\a` stand for?

Alert (a bell sound)

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> cout << "123\r456\b789" << endl;
> ```

45789

> How to specify literal `3` as an `unsigned` type, as a `long`, as a `long double`?

`3u`  `3L`  `3.0L`

> Let `i` be an `int`. Can we write `-i` instead of `-1 * i`?

Yes.

*Technically speaking, even for a negative number like `-42`, the `-` sign is not part of the literal, but an operator that negates the value of the decimal literal `42`.*

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> int a = 010, b = 0x10;
> cout << a + b << endl;
> ```

24

> Pick out the invalid literal(s) and explain why.
>
> `1024f`
>
> `nullptr`
>
> `L"L"`
>
> `'\1234'`

`1024 ` is an integral literal, and cannot have a floating-point type. May change it to `1024.f`.

An escape sequence can have at most 3 octal digits after `\`, so `'\1234'` must be invalid.

*Note that `nullptr` is a pointer literal.*

> How to convert a `char` that represents a decimal digit to an `int`, so that `'1'` becomes `1`, `'2'` becomes `2`, and so on?

```c++
int ctoi(char c) {	return c - '0'; }
```

> How to convert a `char` that represents a hexadecimal digit to an `int`, so that `'1'` becomes `1`, `'A'` or `'a'` becomes  `10`, `'F'` or `'f'` becomes `15`?

```c++
const string HEX = "0123456789ABCDEF";
int ctoi(char c) {	return HEX.find(c); }	// returns string::npos if not found
```

##### 2.2 Variables

Variable definition: *type-specifier* *variable-name* *(optionally, initializer)*;

Initialization is *not* assignment, even sometimes when `=` is used.

Basically,

- *default* initialize with nothing
- *copy* initialize with `=`
- *direct* initialize with `()`
- *list* initialize with `{}`

Also,

- *value* initialization
- *in-class* initializers

A definition creates the entity -- allocates the storage and may provide the variable an initial value.

A declaration only makes a name known to the program. It is needed for a name that is defined elsewhere.

A definition is a declaration.

> Is the following line legal?
>
> ```c++
> int a = 3, b = a + 4;
> ```
>
> What about
>
> ```c++
> int a = b + 4, b = 3;
> ```

Yes. No.

> What's the problem with
>
> ```c++
> int a {3.14};
> ```

List initialization does not allow narrowing conversion (where loss of information happens).

> How to access a global variable `var` when there is a variable of the same name in the local scope?

`::var`

> Is a pointer defined in a function default initialized to `nullptr`?

No.

##### 2.3 Compound Types

Declaration (in a general sense): *base-type* *declarator*

`&` and `*` in declarator are called `type-modifier`.

A reference is not an object.

A valid pointer can be in one of three states:

1. it stores the address of an object;
2. it stores the address just past the end of an object;
3. it is a null pointer.

`nulllptr` is a prvalue of type `std::nullptr_t`.

> The type of a reference and the object to which it refers must match exactly, with only two exceptions. What are they?

1. A *reference-to-const* may be initialized from any expression that can be converted to the type of the reference. In particular, we may bind a reference-to-const to a non-const object,  a literal, or a more general expression.
2. We may bind a reference to a base-class type to an object of a type derived from that base class.

> The type of a pointer and the object to which it points must match exactly, with only two exceptions. What are they?

1. A pointer-to-const may point to a non-const object.
2. We may bind a pointer to a base-class type to an object of a type derived from that base class.


> Is the following line legal? Why and why not?
>
> ```c++
> int * p = (1 - 1);
> ```
>

Illegal. In general, we cannot assign `int` to an `int *`, since there is no rule for such conversion. One may argue that `int * p = 0;` is legal however. This is because integral literal 0 is special. It is also a *null pointer constant*. According to the standard, a *null pointer constant* is an integer literal with value zero or a prvalue of type `std::nullptr_t`. That is, a *null pointer constant* is either integral literal 0, or `nullptr`.

*Note that valid conversions only occur*

1. *between boolean and arithmetic types;*
2. *between integral and floating-pointing types;*
3. *from out-of-range values to unsigned/signed types*.

> Given `p` is an `int *`, what does `if (p) { /* ... */ }` do?

It check whether `p` points to any object.

*A pointer can be used as a condition. It is false if and only if it is a null pointer.*

> What is a `void *` pointer?

A pointer that may hold the address of any object. The freedom comes with the restriction that it cannot be dereferenced. In general, we use a `void *` pointer to deal with memory as memory.

##### 2.4 `const` Qualifier

The restrictions with a `const` object are

1. a `const` object must be initialized;
2. to refer to a `const` object, we must use a reference-to-const;
3. to point to a `const` object, we must use a pointer-to-const.

The freedom with a reference-to-const is that we can initialize a reference-to-const from any expression that can be converted to the type of the reference. What actually happens is that the reference-to-const is bound to a unnamed, temporary object that is evaluated from the expression.

| top-level `const`                        | low-level `const`                        |
| ---------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| object itself                            | what this object refers/points to        |
| *e.g.* a const `int`, a const pointer    | *e.g.* a reference-to-const, a pointer-to-const |
| `const int c = 42;`  `int * const top = p;` | `const int & r` `const int * p;`         |
| must be initialized                      | a pointer-to-const need not be initialized[^*] |

[^*]: A reference-to-const must be initialized though, because a reference must be initialized.

- Top-level `const` is ignored in copying.
- Low-level `const` is never ignored in copying.

In general[^#], we can convert a non-const object to a const object, but not the other way round.

[^#]: There are exceptions. For example, cannot convert `const int **` to `int **`.

The recommended style is

```c++
const int a = 3,
	*p = &a,
	*const cp = &a,
	** pp = &p,
	*const* pcp = &cp,
	*const*const cpcp = pcp,
	*const*const& rpcp = pcp;
```

- `const` is a qualifier.
- `constexpr` is a specifier, which imposes a *top-level* const.

Literal types include:

1. arithmetic types;
2. pointer types;
3. reference types;
4. literal classes [^a];
5. enumerations.

[^a]: aggregate classes with only literal-type members

> Can we initialize a `const` object with a value this is not known until run time? If so, give an example.

Yes.

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
int main(int argc, char ** argv)
{
    // according to the standard, argv[0] can be either empty or program name
	const string cmd = argv[0];
	cout << cmd << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

> Is the following line legal?

```c++
int const a = 3, b = 4;
cout << b++ << endl;
```

No.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> // file1.cpp
> const int a = 3;
> void foo();
> int main()
> {
>     foo();
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```
>
> ```c++
> // file2.cpp
> #include <iostream>
> const int a = 4;
> void foo()
> {
>     std::cout << a << std::endl;
> }
> ```
>
> What changes can we make if we wish to print out the value of the other `a`?

4.

In *file1.cpp:* change `const int a = 3;` to `extern int a = 3;` 

In *file2.cpp:* change `const int a = 4;` to `extern int a;`

*To share a `const` object across multiple files, `extern` is need for both definition and declarations.*

> Is the following definition of reference-to-const legal?
>
> ```c++
> const int a = 3;
> int & ra = a;
> ```

No.

> Are the following definitions of reference-to-const legal?
>
> ```c++
> int a = 3;
> const int & ra = a;
> const double b = 3.14;
> const int & rb = a;
> const int & rc = rb * 2;
> ```

Yes.

> ```c++
> const int a = 0;
> const int & b = a;
> const int & c = b;
> a = 1;
> ```
>
> What are the values of `a`, `b`, and `c`?
>
> What if we change the first line into `const double a = 0;`?

1 1 1.

1 0 0.

> Is the following line legal?

```c++
int const a = 3, * p = & a, * const q = p, & r = a , * & s = p, * const & t = q;
```

Yes.

> Are the following lines legal?

```c++
int a = 3;
int * const p1 = &a;
int * p2 = p1;
int * const p3 = p2;
```

Yes.

> Are the following lines legal?

```c++
const int a = 3, * p1 = &a;
int * const p2 = p1;
```

No.

*Low-level `const` is never ignored in copying.*

> Are the following lines legal?
>
> ```c++
> int a = 3, * p1 = &a;
> const int * p2 = p1;
> ```

Yes.

> Suppose `p` is an `int * const *`. Do we have to initialize it?
>
> Suppose `q` is an `int const * const *`. Do we have to initialize it?

No. No.

> Is `int * const * p, c;` legal?
>
> Is `int const * const * q, d;` legal? Why?

Yes. No. `d` is a `const int`, which must be initialized.

> What's the problem with the following lines?
>
> ```c++
> int ** p;
> const int ** q = p;
> ```

Consider

```c++
int a = 3;
int * p;
const int ** q = p;	// illegal
*q = &a; // use q to point p to a
*p = 4;  // change a's value via p
```

If conversion from `int **` to `const int **` were allowed, then we could change the value of `a` via `q` with a workaround which is hard for the compiler to detect. Separately, `*q = &a`; and `*p = 4;` should be legal. But they combine to achieve the same effect as `**q = 4;`, which is against the promise of low-level `const`.

> Is the following line legal?
>
> ```c++
> int ** p, *const* q = p;
> ```

Yes.

> Does `constexpr` imply `const`?

Yes, top-level `const`.

> Can a `string` be a constant expression?

No.

*A constant expression can have only literal types. Among literal types are arithmetic types, pointers, references, literal classes, and enumerations.*

> Can we specify a variable defined in a function as `constexpr`?

Yes, only if the variable is `static`.

> Are the following lines legal?
>
> ```c++
> int constexpr a = 3, b = 4;
> ++b;
> ```

No.

> Is the following program legal?
>
> ```c++
> int main()
> {
>     static int a = 3;
>     constexpr int * p = &a;
>     (*p)++;
>     static string s = "Hello";
>     constexpr string & r = s;
>     r = "World";
>     reutrn 0;
> }
> ```

Yes.

#####2.5 Dealing with Types

`auto` and `decltype` are *type-specifiers*.

Rules for`auto`:

1. When we use a reference as an initializer for `auto`, the type is that of the corresponding object.
2. `auto` ignores top-level `const` in the initializer [^&].
3. `auto` keeps low-level `const` in the initializer.
4. To explicitly make the deduced type top-level `const`, use `const auto`.
5. To explicitly make the deduced type a reference, modify the declarator with `&`.
6. To explicitly make the deduced type a pointer, modify the declarator with `*`.
7. The `const` that appears adjacent to `auto` qualifies the base type.
8. The `&` and `*` used together with `auto` are part of declarator(s), not part of the base type.

[^&]: Except when we modify the declarator with `&`, in which case the top-level `const` in the initializer indicates a low-level `const` in the reference.

Difference between `auto` and `decltype`:

|                                        | `auto` | `decltype`  |
| -------------------------------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| Ignores top-level `const`?             | Yes    | No          |
| Ignores reference?                     | Yes    | No [^L]     |
| Depends on the form of the expression? | No     | Yes [^(())] |

[^L]: For an expression which is not a single variable and which yields a lvalue, `decltype` returns a reference type. For example, `decltype(*p)`, where `p` is an `int *`, would return an `int &`, not just a plain `int`.
[^(())]: For a single variable `a`, `decltype(a)` returns a plain type, whereas `decltype((a))` returns a reference type. For example, given `a` is an `int`, `decltype(a)` returns an `int`, whereas `decltype((a))` returns an `int &`.

> Given
>
> ```c++
> typedef const int * T;
> using S = T const *;
> ```
>
> What type does `const S ` stand for?

`const int *const*const`

> Are the following lines legal?
>
> ```c++
> char ca[] = "hello";
> using S = char *;
> const S s = ca;
> s[0] = 'H';
> ```

Yes.

*Note that the `const` is top-level. `s` is a const pointer, not a pointer-to-const. So we may use `s` to alter `ca`, but we cannot assign other `char *` to `s`.*

> Given
>
> ```c++
> int n = 42;
> int * const p = &n;
> auto & a = p;
> ```
>
> Is `(*a)++;` legal?
>
> What about `a = nullptr;`?

Yes. No.

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> const auto a = 3, & b = a, *const c = &a;
> ```
>
> What is the type of `a`, `b`, and `c`?

`a` is a `const int`.

`b` is a `const int &` (a reference-to-const).

`c` is a `const int * const` (a const pointer-to-const).

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> int a = 3, *p = &a;
> auto b = *p;
> decltype(*p) c = *p;
> b++;
> c++;
> cout << a << endl;
> ```

4

> Given
>
> ```c++
> int a = 3, r = &a;
> ```
>
> How can we use `decltype` on `a` but returns a reference type?
>
> How can we use `decltype` on `r` but returns a non-reference, plain type?

`decltype((a))` `decltype(r + 0)`

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> #include <type_traits>
> #include <vector>
>
> int main()
> {
> 	const std::vector<int> vec = {1,2,3};
> 	for (auto &i : vec)
> 		std::cout << std::is_const<decltype(i)>() << " ";
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```
>
> It is said top-level `const` is *not* ignored if we use `auto &` to deduce the type. Why, in this case, is the output `0 0 0`, indicating non-const? How to modify it so that the output becomes `1 1 1`?

`i` is a `const int &`. The top-level `const` in `vector<int>` becomes low-level `const` for `i`.

Either `decltype(i)` or `decltype((i))` returns `const int &`, which is low-level `const`, while `is_const` checks top-level `const`.

To make the output `1 1 1`, change the for body into

```c++
std::cout << std::is_const<std::remove_reference<decltype(i)>::type>() << " ";
```

Now `std::remove_reference<decltype(i)>::type` is `const int`.

> A fragment of code shows
>
> ```c++
> decltype(i) j = k;
> ```
>
> Is it possible that `j` is deduced to be a reference bound to `k`?

Yes, if `i` itself is a reference.

#####2.6 Defining Our Own Data Structures

> How is a class data member initialized if it does not have an *in-class initializer*?

Default initialized.

> Can we define a class inside a function?

Yes, though with limited functionality.

> How to ensure safety when a header may be included multiple times?

Use header guards.

```c++
#ifndef HEADER_NAME_H
#define HEADEA_NAME_H
// contents of the header
#endif
```

