18/03/27 = Tue

**Exercise 16.32:** What happens during template argument deduction?

**Answer:** Template parameters are initialized using the arguments passed to the template. For the parameters that use the template type parameters, the initialization rules are special. In particular, only top-level const and array/function-to-pointer conversions are allowed. Moreover, rather than converting the arguments, the compiler generates a new instantiation.

**Exercise 16.33:** Name two type conversions allowed on function arguments involved in template argument deduction.

**Answer:** 

1. top-level const is discarded
2. array/function-to-pointer conversion is allowed

**Exercise 16.34:** Given only the following code, explain whether each of these calls is legal. If so, what is the type of `T`? If not, why not?

```c++
template <class T> int compare(const T&, const T&); 
(a) compare("hi", "world"); 
(b) compare("bye", "dad");
```

**Answer:** Note that the template type parameter is a reference type, so array-to-pointer conversion does not apply.

(a) illegal, because types of `"hi"` and `"world"` differ. The former has `const char[3]` type whereas the latter has `const char[6]` type.

(b) legal, because both has `const char[4]` type.

**Exercise 16.35:** Which, if any, of the following calls are errors? If the call is legal, what is the type of `T`? If the call is not legal, what is the problem?

```c++
template <typename T> T calc(T, int);
template <typename T> T fcn(T, T);
double d;  float f;  char c; 
(a) calc(c, 'c'); 
(b) calc(d, f); 
(c) fcn(c, 'c'); 
(d) fcn(d, f);
```

**Answer:** 

(a) legal, `char`.

(b) legal, `double`.

(c) legal, `char`.

(d) illegal, because the first and second parameter must have exactly the same type. Arithmetic conversion is not allowed.

**Exercise 16.36:** What happens in the following calls:

```c++
template <typename T> f1(T, T);
template <typename T1, typename T2> f2(T1, T2);
int i = 0, j = 42, *p1 = &i, *p2 = &j;
const int *cp1 = &i, *cp2 = &j; 
(a) f1(p1, p2); 
(b) f2(p1, p2); 
(c) f1(cp1, cp2); 
(d) f2(cp1, cp2); 
(e) f1(p1, cp1); 
(f) f2(p1, cp1);
```

**Answer:**

(a) instantiate with `int *` as `T`

(b) instantiate with `int *` as `T1` and `T2`

(c) instantiate with `const int *` as `T`

(d) instantiate with `const int *` as `T1` and `T2`

(e) illegal because low-level const cannot be discarded and types of `p1` and `cp1` differ

(f) instantiate with `int *` as `T1` and `const int *` as `T2`

**Exercise 16.37:** The library `max` function has two function parameters and returns the larger of its arguments. This function has one template type parameter. Could you call `max` passing it an `int` and a `double`? If so, how? If not, why not?

**Answer** Yes. `std::max<double>` converts the `int` to `double`, or `std::max<int>` converts `double` to `int`.

**Exercise 16.38:** When we call `make_shared` (ยง 12.1.1, p. 451), we have to provide an explicit template argument. Explain why that argument is needed and how it is used.

**Answer:** `make_shared` is a template function with type parameter `T`, which returns a `shared_ptr<T>` according to the type parameter `T`. Because `T` and thus `shared_ptr<T>` cannot be deduced from the function parameter, `make_shared` requires the caller to explicitly pass the argument `T`.

Consider

```c++
auto sptr = make_shared<std::vector<std::string>>({"a", "an", "the"});
```

which constructs from the initializer list and returns a `shared_ptr<std::vector<std::string>>`. This return type cannot be deduced merely from `{"a", "an", "the"}`. Thus, an explicit argument is required.