18/03/10 = Sat

**Exercise 13.51**: Although `unique_ptrs` cannot be copied, in *ยง 12.1.5 (p. 471)* we wrote a `clone` function that returned a `unique_ptr` by value. Explain why that function is legal and how it works.

```c++
unique_ptr<int> clone(int p)
{
	return unique_ptr<int>(new int(p));
}
```

**Answer:** The temporary constructed by `new int(p)` is about to be destroyed, so is the unique pointer initialized from it. Since the object being returned is about to be destroyed, it is moved rather than copied.

**Exercise 13.52:** Explain in detail what happens in the assignments of the `HasPtr` objects on *page 541*. In particular, describe step by step what happens to values of `hp`, `hp2`, and of the `rhs` parameter in the `HasPtr` assignment operator.

```c++
class HasPtr {
public:
    HasPtr(HasPtr &&p) noexcept : ps(p.ps), i(p.i) { p.ps = 0; }
    HasPtr & operator=(HasPtr rhs)
    {
        swap(*this, rhs);
        return *this;
    }
    // other members ...
}
```

```c++
hp = hp2;
hp = std::move(hp2);
```

**Answer:** Note that `HasPtr & operator=(HasPtr rhs)` represents both copy- and move-assignment.

- `hp = hp2;` calls copy-assignment. First, the parameter `rhs` is initialized from `hp2`. Then, the `ps` and `i` members of `hp` and `rhs` are swapped. In effect, `hp` is assigned with the value of `hp2`, while `hp2` remains unaffected.
- `hp = std::move(hp2);` calls move-assignment. First, an xvalue expression is returned by `std::move(hp2)`, which is equivalent to a `static_cast` to an rvalue reference type. It enables moving from `hp2`. Then, the parameter `rhs` is initialized from `std::move(hp2)`. This is not a copy, but a move, where moves all the resources from `hp2` to `rhs`. Finally, after a swap, `hp` has all the resources from `rhs`, which was moved from `hp2`. `hp2` is now in a valid, destructible state. Yet we cannot make any assumptions about its value.

