#### Chapter 13 Copy Control

A class controls how its objects are

1. copied
2. moved
2. assigned
3. destructed

The related operations include

1. copy constructor
2. copy-assignment operator
3. move constructor
4. move-assignment operator
5. destructor

which are collectively referred to as *copy control*.

#####13.1 Copy, Assign, and Destroy

######13.1.1 The Copy Constructor

> Can a synthesized copy constructor copy members of array type?

Yes.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct C
> {
> 	int a[2] {};
> };
> int main()
> {
> 	C c;
> 	for (auto & i : c.a)
> 		i = 42;
> 	C d(c);
> 	for (auto i : d.a)
> 		cout << i << " ";
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

`42 42`

> What is the difference between *direct* initialization and *copy* initialization?

Direct initialization asks the compiler to use ordinary function matching to select the constructor that best matches the argument(s) provided.

Copy initialization asks the compiler to copy the right-hand operand into the object being created, converting that operand if necessary.

Ordinarily, copy initialization uses the *copy* constructor in the form of `C(const C &)`. However, if a class has a *move* constructor, then copy initialization sometimes uses the move constructor instead of the copy constructor.

Copy initialization happens not only when we define variables using an `=`, but also when we

1. pass an object as an argument to a parameter of non-reference type;
2. return an object from a function that has a non-reference return type;
3. brace initialize the elements in an array or the members of an aggregate class.

Because of extensive implicit use of a copy constructor, it should *not* be declared as `explicit`.

> Why must a copy constructor's own parameter be a reference?

Because passing an object as an argument to a parameter of non-reference type invokes copy initialization, if a copy constructor itself took a parameter of non-reference type, that would be an endless recursive call.

> Consider the following program. Will it compile? If yes, what's the output? If no, why?
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct Foo
> {
>     int dat = 0;
>     Foo() = default;
>     explicit Foo(const Foo & orig) : dat(orig.dat) {}
> };
> int get(Foo foo) { return foo.dat; }
> int main()
> {
>     Foo foo;
>     cout << get(Foo(foo)) << endl;
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

No. The copy constructor is unconventionally declared as `explicit`. Though `Foo(foo)` is legal, when passing the temporary object so constructed to `get`, again implicit use of the copy constructor is required. However, the copy constructor is `explicit`, which leads to a compilation error.

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> #include <string>
> using namespace std;
> class my_string
> {
> 	string str;
> public:
> 	my_string(const string & str) : str(str)          { clog << "direct "; }
> 	my_string(const my_string & orig) : str(orig.str) { clog << "copy ";   }
> };
>
> int main()
> {
> 	string s;
> 	my_string ms = s;
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

The output could be `direct` (with plain `g++`) or `direct copy` (if `-fno-elide-constructors` is specified).

- With plain `g++`, copy elision may take place. To execute `my_string ms = s;` is as if to execute `my_string ms(s);`
- If `-fno-elide-constructors` is specified, copy elision is disabled. To execute `my_string ms = s;`, a temporary object is first constructed with ` my_string(const string &)`, then the copy constructor `my_string(const my_string &)` is called to initialize `ms` from the temporary.

*In C++ computer programming, **copy elision** refers to a compiler optimization to eliminate unnecessary copies in certain situations.*

*`-fno-elide-constructors`: The C++ standard allows an implementation to omit creating a temporary which is only used to initialize another object of the same type. Specifying this option disables that optimization, and forces G++ to call the copy constructor in all cases.*

> What is the output of
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> #include <string>
> using namespace std;
> class my_string
> {
> 	string str;
> public:
> 	my_string() = default;
> 	my_string(const string & str) : str(str)          { clog << "direct "; }
> 	my_string(const my_string & orig) : str(orig.str) { clog << "copy ";   }
> };
>
> int main()
> {
> 	my_string ms;
> 	my_string ms2 = ms;
> 	my_string ms3(ms);
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

`copy copy`

*No matter it's compiled with plain `g++` or `g++ -fno-elide-constructors`.*

###### 13.1.2 The Copy-Assignment Operator

**overloaded operator=**

```c++
class A
{
public:
	A & operator=(const A &);
    // ...
};
```

- must be defined as a member function
  - left-hand operand is bound to implicit `this`
  - right-hand operand is explicitly passed
- usually returns a reference to the left-hand operand [^container]

[^container]: library requires that types stored in a container to do so

For a synthesized copy-assignment operator, **array** members are assigned by assigning each element of the array.

###### 13.1.3 The Destructor

The destructor body does not directly destroy the members themselves. Members are destroyed as part of the implicit destruction phase that follows the destructor body. A destructor body executes *in addition to* the memberwise destruction that takes place as part of destroying the object.

> Can we have two destructors for one class?

No.

> Compare the order of construction and that of destruction.

- construction: members are initialized before the function body is executed; members are initialized in the same order as they appear in the class
- destruction: function body is executed before members are destroyed; members are destroyed in reverse order from the order in which they are initialized

> What is the relationship between a destructor and `delete p;`?

`p` must be a pointer to a dynamically allocated object. Say the object has type `T`. If `T` is a built-in type, then that object is destroyed and the memory is freed. If `T` is a class type, then the destructor of the class is called, which will perform whatever is needed to destroy the object.

*Built-in types do not have destructors.*

> When is a temporary object destroyed?

Temporary objects are destroyed at the end of the full expression they're part of.

A full expression is an expression that isn't a sub-expression of some other expression. Usually this means it ends at the `;` (or `)` for `if`, `while`, `switch`) denoting the end of the statement. Note that we may extend the lifetime of temporaries by binding them to a const reference. Doing so extends their lifetime to the reference's lifetime.

###### 13.1.4 The Rule of Three/Five

> State and explain the Rule of Three.

The Rule of Three/Five states that in class design we'd better think of the following three/five copy-control members as a unit when considering whether we need them;

1. copy constructor
2. copy-assignment operator
3. destructor
4. move constructor
5. move-assignment operator

In particular, we have two rules of thumb:

1. Whenever we need to define a destructor, we almost surely need to define a copy constructor and a copy-assignment operator
2. Whenever we need to define a copy constructor, we almost surely need to define a copy-assignment operator, and vice versa.

When we need to define a destructor, there must be some additional work to do besides the implicit memberwise destruction. Most likely we have some dynamically allocated resources to free. For the pointers in an object that manage the resources, the copy would be shallow in the synthesized version. In such cases, all the copies of an object share one piece of memory. The destruction of one object would free that memory and invalidate all the other copies. Consider

```c++
class C
{
    int * p;
public:
    C() = delete;
    C(int a) : p(new int(a)) {}
    ~C() { delete p; }
friend
    void print(C c)
    {   // initialize the parameter c from the argument
        cout << *c.p << endl;
    }   // call destructor which deletes p 
};

void print(C c);
int main()
{
    C c(42);
    print(c);
    return 0;	// disaster: c.p has been deleted in print()!
}
```

Likewise, when we need to define a copy constructor, there must be something different than memberwise copy. For example, we may give a unique serial number to every object that we construct. In this case, we do not hope the copy-assignment from one object to obliterate the serial number of another object. To this end, we need to define a copy-assignment operator, too.

###### 13.1.5  Using `= default`

> On what may we specify `= default`?

On the declaration/definition of a copy-control member.

###### 13.1.6 Preventing Copies

> We may specify `= default` either on the declaration or the definition of a copy-control member, but we must specify `= delete` on the first declaration of a deleted function. Why is the difference?

- For `= default`, the compiler does not need to know how to implement a copy-control member until it needs it.
- For `= delete`, the compiler must know a copy-control member or an ordinary member function is deleted so as to prohibit any attempt to use it.

> Can a class have deleted destructor?

Yes, but with only limited use. In particular, we cannot define variables or temporaries of a class that has a deleted destructor. We may dynamically allocate objects of that class, though the pointers generated cannot be deleted.

> In essence, if a class has a member that cannot be default constructed, copied, assigned or destructed, the corresponding copy-control member(s) will be synthesized as deleted. With this principle, explain:  If a class has a member whose destructor is deleted or inaccessible, its default and copy constructors will be synthesized as deleted.

If a class has a member whose destructor is deleted or inaccessible, any object constructed cannot be properly destroyed. 

> If a class has a `const` member, which of its copy-control members will be synthesized as deleted and why?

Copy-assignment operator, because a `const` member cannot be assigned.

> If a class has a reference member, its copy-assignment operator will be synthesized as deleted. Why?

Although we may assign a new value to a reference member, doing so only changes the value of the object to which the left-hand operand refers. The left-hand operand and right-hand operand still refer to different objects. Because this is unlikely to be the intention of assignment, the synthesized version is defined as deleted.

##### 13.2 Copy Control and Resource Management

> Suppose we have a class `C` that has a member `d`  which has type `T *`. Further suppose `d` points to dynamically allocated memory. Discuss how to design copy-control members to perform value-like copy and pointer-like copy, respectively.

| copy-control member      | value-like copy from `c`                                     | pointer-like copy from `c`                                   |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| copy constructor         | dynamically allocate memory to copy `*c.d`, and initialize `d` from the memory's address | initialize `d` from `c.d`, incrementing the reference count by 1 |
| other constructors       | as usual                                                     | initialize the reference count with 1                        |
| copy-assignment operator | be careful of (1) memory leaks, (2) self-assignment, and (3) exception-safety: dynamically allocate memory to copy `*c.d`, and then delete `d`, and then assign the new memory's address to `d` | assign `c.d` to `d`, incrementing the reference count for `c` by 1, while decrementing the reference count for this object by 1 |
| destructor               | delete `d`                                                   | decrement the reference count by 1, and delete `d` if the count becomes 0 |

> Explain exception-safety in writing a copy-assignment operator for a value-like copy. In particular, why do we write like
>
> ```c++
> C & operator=(const C & c)
> {
>     auto temp = new T(*c.p);
>     delete p;
>     p = temp;
>     return *this;
> }
> ```
>
> rather than
>
> ```c++
> C & operator=(const C & c)
> {
>     delete p;
>     p = new T(*c.p);
>     return *this;
> }
> ```

The general principle is to put copy before deletion. Consider an exception happens when we dynamically allocate the memory. In the first approach, we do not lose the old data, while in the second approach, we cannot recover the old data, since its memory has been freed.

> What is the easiest way to design copy-control for a pointer-like copy?

Use shared pointers.

> To perform pointer-like copy, where to put the reference count, and why?

We have each copy maintain a pointer `p`, which points to a chunk of dynamically allocated memory, in which the reference count is stored.

To understand this design we should think about the ownership of a reference count. A reference count corresponds to all the copies of one object. Neither does it belong to a single object, nor does it belong to the entire class. Suppose we have copies `a`, `b` of one object of class `C`, and copies `d`, `e` of another object of class `C`. We must keep two different reference counts. However, if we store a reference count in each copy, it would be very difficult to update all of them whenever a copy operation takes place. For example, suppose we copy construct `c` from `a`. How can we update the reference count in `b` and the like? By using a pointer to a chunk of dynamically allocated memory, all the copies share the ownership of one reference count.

##### 13.3 Swap

> What's the difference between
>
> ```c++
> std::swap(lhs, rhs);
> ```
>
> with
>
> ```c++
> {
>     using std::swap;
>     swap(lhs, rhs);
> }
> ```

- The first one explicitly calls the standard library version of `swap`.
- The second one prefers to call a type-specific `swap` if there is one. If there isn't, then it will call `std::swap` as the first one does.

> Demonstrate the technique *copy and swap* to implement copy-assignment using a swap.

```c++
C & C::operator=(C c)
{
    swap(*this, c);
    return *this;
}
```

> What's good about *copy and swap*?

1. It automatically handles self-assignment.
2. It is automatically exception-safe.

##### 13.4 A Copy-Control Example

> When should we write our own version of `swap` for a class type?

The standard approach of swapping `a` and `b` involves one copy and two assignments:

1. copy `a` to a temporary `t`
2. assign `b` to `a`
3. assign `t` to `b`

We should write our own version of `swap` whenever this process can be optimized. A good example is a class that has a member which dynamically allocates resources, and the copy behavior of which is value-like. In such case, we may just swap the pointers using `std::swap` to bypass dynamic memory allocation.

> Can we have two classes using each other as its member data type?

No. As a workaround, use pointers to the other class, and use forward declaration.

##### 13.5 Classes That Manage Dynamic Memory

> Where is `std::move` defined?

`<utility>`

> Why does moving provide much better performance than copying?

Because it avoids the overheads of allocating and deallocating the resources.

> If we move construct a `string` `b` from another `string` `a`, does `a` remain valid after construction?

Yes.

> What's the difference between
>
> ```c++
> std::move(*b++);
> ```
>
> and
>
> ```c++
> using std::move;
> move(*b++)
> ```
>
> Which one should we use?

- The first one explicitly call the `move` in the `std` namespace.
- The second one prefers a type-specific `move` if there is one. If there isn't, then it will call the `move` in the `std` namespace.

Contrary to `swap`, for `move`, we should use the first one.

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct A
> {
>     void f()        { cout << __func__ << endl; }
>     static void g() { cout << __func__ << endl; }
>     void h() 
>     {
>     	[this](){f();}();
>     	[this](){g();}();
>     }
> };
> int main() 
> {  
> 	A().h();
>     return 0;
> } 
> ```
>
> Can we omit `this` in the capture list of the first lambda?
>
> Can we omit `this` in the capture list of the second lambda?

No. Yes.

> Why do we declare a class member function inside a header but implement it in a separate source file? Why don't we put the whole function definition in the class in the header?

By separating the header and the source file, we apply the principle of *separation of the interface and the implementation*. The reason for, and the advantages of, doing so are:

1. If you put everything in the header, any tiny change to the implementation will cause all the code that includes the header to recompile, which could be a huge cost for a large project.
2. Consider writing a library for business purpose. You only need to provide the headers and the library binaries to the users, while keeping your proprietary source code within the source files to which the users do not have access.
3. This separation offers better readability.

Nonetheless, this is not always the case:

1. There are many header-only libraries out there that serve a wide audience.
2. For a template class, the implementation generally goes within the header.


##### 13.6 Moving Objects

- *move*: efficient transfer of resources
- `std::move()`: a potentially destructive read

> Why do we move rather than copy?

1. for a significant performance boost in certain cases where a copy is not necessary and a move would do the job, especially when
   1. the objects are large
   2. the objects themselves require memory allocation (e.g. `string`)
2. certain classes have a resource that cannot be shared (e.g. IO types and `unique_ptr`)


> In 10 words, tell the difference between a lvalue and a rvalue.

- lvalue: an object's identity
- rvalue: an object's value

###### 13.6.1 Rvalue References

> Let `i` be an `int`. Is the following expression legal? If so, what does it return? If not, why?
>
> ```c++
> ++(i = 35)++
> ```

No. Note that

1. postfix increment is higher than prefix increment in precedence
2. the associativity is from right to left
3. assignment and prefix increment return lvalues
4. postfix increment return rvalues

Therefore, `(i = 35)` is an lvalue. `(i = 35)++` is an rvalue (*a prvalue to be exact*). Prefix `++` cannot work on an rvalue. It requires an lvalue.

> Why cannot we bind an rvalue reference to a variable defined as an rvalue reference type?

A variable by definition is an lvalue expression.

> Can we bind an lvalue reference to a variable defined as an rvalue reference type?

Yes.

> Where is `std::move` defined?

`<utility>`

> What promise do we make when we call `std::move()` on a variable?

We promise not to use that variable again except for destroying it or assigning to it.

> What does it mean by having a function parameter modified by `&&`?

That parameter is an rvalue reference, which is bound to the argument passed to the function.

###### 13.6.2 Move Constructor and Move Assignment

> What're the important things to keep in mind when overloading an assign operator?

1. Don't you forget `return *this`!
2. Avoid memory leaks
3. Take care of self-assignment
4. Be exception-safe

###### 13.6.3 Rvalue References and Member Functions

