#### Chapter 15 Object-Oriented Programming

#####15.1 OOP: An Overview

> What are the three fundamental concepts regarding OOP?

1. data encapsulation
2. inheritance
3. dynamic binding

> When does dynamic binding happen?

When a *virtual* function is called through a pointer/reference to a base-class type.

> In five words explain *virtual*.

May be redefined later.

##### 15.2 Defining Base and Derived Classes

> Which copy-control member do we need almost surely in a base class, and why?

We need a virtual destructor in a base class even if it does nothing, because it retains the possibility to redefine the destructor later in order to deallocate resources that are dynamically allocated in derived classes.

> Can we have a virtual constructor?

No.

> What design makes possible the *derived-to base* conversion?

That a derived object contains sub-objects for its base classes.

> For a derived object, is the base-class part initialized before the direct, derived-class part?

Yes.

> Consider a `protected` data member in a base class. For a derived object, should we initialize that data member by calling the base-class constructor or by directly assigning to it? Why?

By calling the the base-class constructor. Because we should respect the principle that every class has control over how its members are initialized. 

> Why is it impossible for a class to inherit from itself?

Because a class has to see the full definition of a class before inheriting from it, whereas the inheritance relationship is part of the definition.

> How can one class prevent others from inheriting it?

```c++
class A final
{
    // ...
};
```

> Do smart pointers support derived-to-base conversion?

Yes.

> Distinguish the static type and dynamic type of a variable or an expression.

- static type: type with which a variable is declared, or the expression yields; known at compile time
- dynamic type: type of the object in the memory that the variable or expression represents; not known until run time

> Is it possible for a dynamic type to differ from the static type if the expression is neither a pointer nor a reference?

No.

> What happens when we initialize a base object form a derived object?

The base-class part is used and the direct derived-class part is ignored, or *sliced down*.

##### 15.3 Virtual Functions

> Why do we have to define *every* virtual function that we have declared?

Because in the cases where dynamic binding applies, the compiler does not know which version of virtual functions to call until run time. Thus for every virtual function declared, it has to be defined.

> Is it possible for a call to a virtual function to be resolved at compile time?

Yes, if the call is on a plain object rather than on a pointer or a reference. 

> Give an example that illustrates the exception to the rule that return types of virtual functions must match in a base class and in a derived class.

```c++
struct B
{
    virtual B * f() { return this; }
};
struct D : B
{
    virtual D * f() { return this;}
};
```

> What's point of explicitly specifying `override` for a function?

We explicitly spell out `override` to ask the compiler to verify that we indeed *override* a virtual function in the base class, rather than *hide* it with a function that has the same name but a slightly different parameter list as a result of a careless mistake.

*In C++, name lookup happens before the type checking. That is, as soon as the compiler sees one candidate function in one scope, it stops looking for functions in the outer scopes. It will collect all the candidate functions in that scope, and begin to check if the arguments match any of the parameter lists. If two functions with the same name but different parameter lists are defined in the same scope, they constitute overloaded functions. However, if one function is defined in the inner scope, and the other is defined in the outer scope. Then the inner function simply hides the outer function.*

> Is the following program legal? If yes, what's the output? If no, why not?
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct B {
>     virtual void f(int a = 42) { cout << a << endl; }
> };
> struct D : B {
>     virtual void f(int a = 24) { cout << a << endl; }
> };
> int main() {
> 	D d;
> 	B & r = d;
> 	r.f();
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

Yes. 42.

> How can we circumvent the virtual mechanism? What's the point of doing so?

We may use scope operator to explicitly ask for the virtual function in the base class. Typically, we do so to let the base-class version do the common work of a virtual function.

##### 15.4 Abstract Base Classes

> What is an abstract class? What's special about it?

Any class with a pure virtual function is called an abstract class. We cannot create an object of an abstract class.

> What is refactoring?

Redesigning class hierarchy to move data/operations from one class to another. 

##### 15.5 Access Control and Inheritance

> Is the following program legal? If yes, what's its output? If no, why not?
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct B {
> protected:
> 	 int a = 22;
> };
> struct D : B {
> 	void f() { cout << (this->a = 44) << endl; 	}
> 	void f(B & b) { cout << (b.a = 88) << endl; }
> };
> int main() {
> 	D d;
> 	d.f();
> 	f(d);
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

No. `f(B & b)` cannot access and alter the protected part of a base-class object. A derived class can only access a protected member in the base class through a derived object.

> Comment out inaccessible function calls so that the program may compile
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct B {
> public:		void a() {}
> protected:	void b() {}
> private:	void c() {}
> };
>
> void d(B *) {}
>
> struct D1 : public B {
> 	void f() { a(); }
> 	void g() { b(); }
> 	void h() { d(this); }
> };
>
> struct D2 : protected B {
> 	void f() { a(); }
> 	void g() { b(); }
> 	void h() { d(this); }
> };
>
> struct D3 : private B {
> 	void f() { a(); }
> 	void g() { b(); }
> 	void h() { d(this); }
> };
>
> struct DD : public D2 {
> 	void p() { a(); }
> 	void q() { b(); }
> };
>
>
> int main()
> {
> 	D1 d1;	D2 d2;	D3 d3;
> 	d1.a();	d1.b();	d1.c();
> 	d2.a();	d2.b();	d2.c();
> 	d3.a();	d3.b();	d3.c();
> 	DD dd;
>     dd.a();	dd.b();	dd.c();
>     d(&d1); d(&d2); d(&d3); d(&dd);
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```
>

```c++
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;
struct B {
public:		void a() {}
protected:	void b() {}
private:	void c() {}
};

void d(B *) {}

struct D1 : public B {
	void f() { a(); }
	void g() { b(); }
	void h() { d(this); }
};

struct D2 : protected B {
	void f() { a(); }
	void g() { b(); }
    void h() { d(this); }
};

struct D3 : private B {
	void f() { a(); }
	void g() { b(); }
    void h() { d(this); }
};

struct DD : public D2 {
	void p() { a(); }
	void q() { b(); }
};

int main()
{
	D1 d1;	D2 d2;	D3 d3;
	d1.a();	// d1.b();	d1.c();
	// d2.a();	d2.b();	d2.c();
	// d3.a();	d3.b();	d3.c();
	DD dd;
    // dd.a();	dd.b();	dd.c();
    d(&d1); // d(&d2); d(&d3); d(&dd);
	return 0;
}
```

> Suppose  class `D` is publicly derived from class `B`, and that class `F` is a friend of class `B`. Let `a` be a private, non-const `int` data member in `B`. Is the following line legal?
>
> ```c++
> void F::f(D & d) { d.a  = 42; }
> ```

Yes.

> Consider a private inheritance from class `B`  to class `D`. How to make a public member `a` of `B` accessible to users of class `D`?

Add `using B::a;` in the class definition of `D`.

##### 15.6 Class Scope under Inheritance

> Is the following program legal? If yes, what's the output? If no, why?
>
> ```c++
> #include <iostream>
> using namespace std;
> struct B {};
> struct D : B {
> 	void f() { clog << __func__ << endl; }
> };
> int main() {
> 	D d;
> 	B * p = &d;
> 	p->f();
> 	return 0;
> }
> ```

No. `p` has a static type of `B *` while `f()` is not virtual. Thus the call `p->f()` is resolved at compile time and is an error because `B` does not has a member `f`.

> Why wouldn't the following program compile?
>
> ```c++
> struct B {
> 	virtual void f(){}
> };
> struct D : B {
>     void f(int){}
> };
> int main() {
>     D().f();
>     return 0;
> }
> ```

`D::f(int)` hides, rather than overloads or overrides, the `B::f()` in the outer scope.

*In C++, name lookup happens before type checking.*

> Consider an overloaded virtual function in the base class that has 3 distinct parameter lists. To make all of them available in the derived class, why do we have to override either all of them or none of them?

Suppose we just override one of them. It would hide the rest 2 instances, because the one overridden is in the inner scope while the rest 2 are in the outer scope.

*Nonetheless, we may use `using` to bring some of them in the inner scope.*

##### 15.7 Constructors and Copy Control

> What's the side-effect for having a virtual destructor?

The compiler will not synthesize a move operator for the class.

> Is a constructor inherited automatically?

No, but we can use `using B::B;` to reuse all the constructors in the base class, except for the default, copy, and move ones.

##### 15.8 Containers and Inheritance

> Consider
>
> ```c++
> #include <set>
> struct C {
>     static bool compare(int a, int b) { return a < b; }
>     // std::set<int, decltype(compare) *> group(compare);
>     // std::set<int, decltype(compare) *> group = compare;
>     std::set<int, decltype(compare) *> group {compare};
> };
> ```
>
> Explain why the lines commented out won't compile.

1. for an in-class initializer, we must use either `{}` or `=`
2. the constructor for `std::set()` that takes `compare` is `explicit`

> Elucidate the irony of C++ in object-oriented programming and ways to cope with it.

The irony is that often we cannot use objects directly in object-oriented programming. Because dynamic binding happens only when a virtual function is called on a pointer or a reference to a base-class type, we often have to use pointers or references to objects, rather than objects themselves. For example, to have a container type that contains various class types in a class hierarchy, we let the element type be a shared pointer to the base type. We also design virtual `clone()` methods in base and derived classes which takes a `const C &` or a `C &&` and returns a `C *` by dynamic allocation, where `C` can be either base-class type `B` or derived-class type `D`. Then we design constructors for the container type that take `const C &` and `C &`, which call the clone methods and pass the pointers to construct shared pointers.

##### 15.9 Text Queries Revisited

> Need a derived class to override a private pure virtual function in the base class in order not to be abstract?

Yes.



